 Excerpt originally published in American Agent & Broker MagazineAs agents and brokers you represent high standards of professionalism and responsibility for your clients. Main street businesses and homeowners rely on your ability to secure the best insurance coverage at the most reasonable cost. That’s particularly true during challenging times when hard hit coastal areas experience more severe and frequent catastrophes that require increased resources from the insurance industry. According to BusinessWeek the number of natural disasters costing $1 billion or more has doubled since 1996 when compared with the previous 15-year period. As the industry seeks to adapt predictive analytics is one way insurers will protect their bottom line and make needed investments in technology and enhanced customer service capabilities.Intro to Predictive AnalyticsPredictive analytics uses statistical and analytical techniques to develop predictive models that enable accurate predictions about future outcomes. Predictive models can take various forms with most models generating a score that indicates the likelihood a given future scenario will occur. For instance a predictive model can identify the probability that a policy will have a claim.Why Carriers Are Turning to Predictive AnalyticsThere’s no question that technology has fundamentally changed the pace of business. Your customers demand a faster response time which means underwriters need to return quotes to you more quickly. Consider the example of FirstComp reported by The Motley Fool in May 2011. FirstComp created a straight forward online interface for agents to request workers’ compensation quotes. What they found was remarkable. When they provided a quote within one minute of the agent’s request they booked that policy 52% of the time. However their success percentage declined with each passing hour they waited to respond with a quote. In fact if FirstComp waited a full 24 hours to respond their close rate plummeted to 30 percent.Added to these new industry dynamics is the reality that both workers’ compensation and homeowners are highly unprofitable for carriers. The average combined ratio for workers’ comp is 115 percent (100 percent is break even; anything above 100 percent represents an underwriting loss for the carrier).A similarly bleak picture emerges when you look at the performance of homeowners insurance. The average combined ratio for homeowners carriers from 2008-2011 was 113 percent compared to 102 percent across all property and casualty lines of business. In order to improve their companies’ performance and better meet the needs of agents underwriters need advanced tools and methodologies that provide access to information in real-time.How Does Predictive Analytics Help Insurance Agents?Maintaining a viable diverse insurance market is valuable for the independent insurance agent market. Predictive analytics helps insurance carriers manage and spread risk much more effectively by segmenting higher risk policies from lower risk policies.Pricing Advantages for Better Risks: When policyholders with favorable claims outcomes and risk profiles are more easily and reliably identified they will receive better pricing.More relevant individualized policy reviews: Rather than make wholesale judgments about certain types of businesses or homes underwriters make better informed decisions on individual policies when they have more relevant data available. For instance an underwriter can use predictive analytics to discern that Roofing Company A is a better risk than Roofing Company B.Greater Efficiency: A big part of providing good customer service today depends on the speed of your response. Customers expect information to be instantly available and insurance carriers incorporating predictive analytics are able to quote business faster and more accurately.Maintain Choice and Market Stability: Carriers suffering from poor systemic performance negatively impact their ability to pay claims. You want to choose the best carrier for your customer and have confidence that the carrier will be around for the long term.As with any new innovation the way predictive analytics is implemented will determine its success. Fortunately insurers have learned from early mistakes and made great strides in understanding how to build valid predictive models and integrate these models into their operations in a way that improves decision making and improves agent response times. 
 Excerpt from full article originally published on Insurance Thought LeadershipInsurance carriers have been hit hard not only by the declines in the financial market but from converging industry dynamics that in combination magnify their impact. Executives now find themselves at a crossroads: identify the relevant issues and adapt or continue using outdated approaches which are quickly becoming relics of a bygone era.Are we in a hard market?According to MarketScout the average property/casualty rate increased by 5% from 2011 to 2012 with this same upward trend continuing into 2013. And yet just last week the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers (CIAB) reported that rate increases in the second quarter did not keep pace with the previous two quarters. The reality is that while carriers are seeing much lower returns on investment income there is an increase in total surplus dollars relative to total premium. This dynamic makes sustaining a hard market difficult and therefore pricing competition for the best risks continues to be fierce.Tackling Economic StagnancyA sluggish economic recovery affects insurance premiums. For commercial lines carriers the slow growth in payroll means that overall exposure is not increasing at the same rate as medical inflation. Various estimates put medical inflation in the 4% range for 2012 and payroll growth under 2%.Regulation WoesAccording to the 2013 KPMG survey 60% of executives stated that regulatory and legislative pressures served as the most significant inhibitor of growth in the coming year a 13% increase from the 2012 survey and 19% from 2011’s.Data Access & LiteracyAccording to a KPMG study only 55% of execs claimed that their company demonstrated advanced data and analytics literacy. If the other 45% want to stay competitive they need to make analytics a top priority moving forward.Big data is now a board level conversation and carriers are being asked: “What is your big data strategy?” When that question arises in your meeting will you have a good answer?Talent Crisis The industry is estimated to have 400000 positions to fill by 2020 and 20 percent of underwriters will retire in the next few years. The up-and-coming generation of workers expect to use sophisticated tools and advanced technologies in the workplace. 
 Excerpt originally published in Construction Owner Business MagazineFor most businesses workers compensation is the single largest insurance expense line item. Being able to secure the lowest possible premium and reduce the impact of an audit will help you avoid the headaches many companies face in managing workers compensation insurance.Construction has Nation’s Highest Misclassified Payroll at $76.8 BillionValen Analytics provides advanced data and analytics to help property and casualty insurance companies evaluate the potential risk of individual policies. We have a large database containing four million workers compensation insurance policies which allows us to gain insights into industry trends. When we examined the four-year period between 2008 through 2011 we found that construction has the largest percentage of misclassified payroll resulting in an average of 14% or $76.8 billion in post-recession payroll out of the 20 distinct industries identified by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).Top Class CodesAfter conducting a nationwide study of misclassification Valen researchers were able to narrow the findings to 15 job classification codes. Valen’s data modeling team analyzed 106 class codes within construction classifying the top 15 as key drivers of misclassification which account for 75% or $57.6 billion of the total $76.8 billion in misclassified payroll. The total misclassified payroll amount is based on the most recent Bureau of Labor Statistics 2010 payroll for construction.Why Misclassification Matters to Construction OwnersWhen an industry has significant misclassification issues it can affect the premiums all companies in that industry pay. To be fair part of the reason construction ranks as the highest industry for misclassification is because it is the most heavily scrutinized. There are many more job classification categories in construction than other industries which also means there is a wide variance in the insurance rates companies are charged. Misclassified payroll is typically identified following an audit and larger accounts have a higher likelihood of being audited. It’s understandable when you think about the difficulty an auditor faces in tracking down the hundreds of thousands of small construction companies with owners in the field every day.Being prepared for a workers compensation insurance audit is critical. If significant issues are found during an audit your rates can increase sharply and for the long term you can suffer gaps in coverage and in some cases be denied coverage. 
 Excerpt originally published on Insurance Thought LeadershipFor many years insurance companies built their reserves by focusing on investment strategies. The recent financial crisis changed that: insurers became incentivized to shift their focus as yields became more unpredictable than ever. As insurance carriers looked to the future they know that running a profitable underwriting operation is critical to their long term stability.Profitable underwriting is easier said than done. Insurers already have highly competent teams of underwriters so the big question becomes “How do I make my underwriting operation as efficient and profitable as possible without creating massive disruptions with my current processes?”There are three core challenges that are standing in the way:Lack of Visibility: Although you may be familiar with a specific segment of the market do you really know how well your portfolio is performing against the industry or how volume and profit tradeoffs are impacting your overall performance?Current Pricing Approach: You know the agents that underwriters engage with every day want you to give them the right price for the right risk and it’s not easy. In fact it’s nearly impossible. Underwriters are often asked to make decisions based on limited industry data and a limited set of risk characteristics that may or may not be properly weighted.Inertia: When executives talk about how to solve these challenges around visibility and pricing most admit they’re concerned about how to overcome corporate inertia and institutional bias. The last thing you want to do is lead a large change initiative and end up alienating your agents your analysts and your underwriters.There’s a strong and growing desire to take advantage of new sources of information and modern tools to help underwriters make risk selection and pricing decisions. The implementation of predictive analytics in particular is becoming a necessity for carriers to succeed in today’s marketplace. With the use of predictive analytics underwriters gain visibility into their portfolio and a deeper understanding of their portfolio’s risk quality. Plus underwriters will get valuable context so they understand what is driving an individual predictive score.Just as insurance leaders are exploring new methods to ensure profitability underwriters are eager to adopt the analytical advancements that will solve the tough problems carriers are facing today. Expecting underwriters to take on today’s challenges using yesterday’s tools and yesterday’s approach to pricing is no longer sustainable. Predictive analytics offers a better and faster method for underwriters to control their portfolio’s performance effectively managing risk and producing better results for an entire organization. 
 It’s the time of year where things start to wind down. With Thanksgiving kicking off the holiday season it’s a good time to reflect on the year and what we are grateful for.When I look at the industry I think of a handful of things. Innovation There is a lot of disruption hitting insurance much of it focused on improving the customer experience. Customer centricity means greater transparency better touchpoints and better methods of digesting complicated concepts.The industry now has the chance to step up and I’m grateful for this growing commitment to the customer.  Companies listening differentiating and delivering means a relationship that goes far beyond a claim. Pushing the Envelope This year our annual ROI study found that 16 of Valen’s work comp clients have experienced 53% growth in premiums (three times better than the industry) and a 25-point reduction in loss ratio (two times better than the industry). This demonstrates our customers’ committment to being strategic getting ahead of the curve and successfully adopting data-driven technologies.We’ve been able to help our customers achieve these targets. But we’ve also been able to help new entrants. Pie Insurance which Valen helped launch last month at InsureTech Connect is one such example. While Pie is spearheading an all- digital experience for purchasing work comp insurance they leverage the application of data driven technologies to provide transparency and to revolutionize commercial lines.I’m grateful for the many different companies that continue to push the envelope to make a difference. Values Values are important. They drive what we do how we behave and what we stand for.  As a matter of fact one Silicon Valley study found 100% of value-driven companies succeed.I have always believed in values and built Valen in the same way.  When we were acquired by Insurity in January it was natural fit because our values heavily align. For example the commitment to move mountains –  to have the courage to take on big challenges work as a united team overcome obstacles with urgency and satisfy the needs of customers is important. And equally doing the right thing and being open honest and transparent is a golden rule for our customers partners and co-workers.I’m grateful that we are in business because of these values and that we do business with those that share the same mindset. Taking Care of People No question it’s been a challenging year for insurers. With the pain experienced by Harvey Irma and Maria getting policyholders’ lives back on track is no easy feat.While the extent of damages has not been fully assessed insurance exists for the sole purpose of sharing risk. This provides people with a safety net to own cars homes start businesses ect. When a disaster strikes this is the most visible of insurance applications in doing good and getting people back on their feet.I’m grateful that insurance can sustain itself but can also take care of people when they need it most.I’d love to hear what you are grateful for this time of year. Feel free to find me on LinkedIn and share your thoughts. I encourage you to think of the ways that you can make a difference both this holiday season and on to 2018. Wishing you and yours a Happy Thanksgiving!  About the Author: Dax Craig is the CEO and president of Valen Analytics® an Insurity company and provider of proprietary data analytics and predictive modeling for P/C insurers. Valen leverages its large contributory data assets to help carriers price insurance policies more accurately and achieve lower loss ratios. Prior to founding Valen in 2004 Dax was founder and CEO of Xertex Technologies which was acquired by a global leader in the wireless antenna industry Centurion Wireless. Dax proceeded to serve as vice president of global business development at Centurion where he was directly responsible for global business development including sales market definition market segmentation market research strategic planning and market development. Dax graduated from the University of Tulsa with a bachelor’s degree in business administration and marketing. He earned his MBA in finance from the University of Colorado at Boulder. Photo: Pro Church Media 
 It’s a great day when we can announce a new customer engagement. Because we work in the heart of decision-making for workers’ compensation underwriting our customers count on us to partner with them in achieving their goals. I applaud Baldwin & Lyons for taking a substantial leap forward with a sophisticated approach to expanding their risk appetite and geographic footprint.One of the biggest challenges insurers face in workers’ compensation underwriting is growing into new segments while maintaining their loss ratio. There is an opportunity to be profitable everywhere if you have the right tools and access to actionable data on your side.Baldwin & Lyons is a property casualty insurer for large and medium-sized trucking and public transportation fleets and a provider of workers’ compensation for businesses of all types. Read the full press release here. 
 Originally published in WorkCompWire May 8 2014The Work Comp Industry’s “Make or Break” MomentBy Featured Author Dax CraigHere lies the honorable Analog Insurance Company a small insurance carrier with so much potential and yet a formidable resistance to innovate that led to its untimely demise. When given the chance to adapt to new technologies the leadership team was hesitant choosing tradition over advancement. The insurance carrier withered as other technology-savvy competitors stealthily consumed the majority market share. Presumably as an expert at managing others’ risk Analog never thought to manage its own until it was too late. Analog is survived by a handful of underwriters and agents who hung on until the end as well as visionless executives who are now looking for a job…While a bit tongue-in-cheek it is absolutely true that a bleak future is on the horizon for carriers who are not actively innovating and embracing the need for new technologies. The old adage “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it” is alive and well in today’s insurance market. Carriers should take a hard look at the late 1980s and 1990s when the credit card industry faced a similar crossroad. Information technology powerhouse Capitol One revolutionized the credit card industry with its innovative use of credit scores identifying consumer spending patterns to find the best risks within the subprime market. Similarly Progressive Insurance used analytics to lead the auto insurance market in the 90s by using credit scores to insure high risk drivers at profitable rates. Those who didn’t use analytics suffered from adverse selection ending up with poorer performing risks because they are working with outdated pricing and risk assessment strategies. And now 80 percent of the personal auto market is controlled by just 10 companies.Work comp carriers can no longer garner profitable market share by simply raising rates and managing risks based on a single set of in-house company data. Many analysts agree that the best thing carriers can do to improve their combined ratio and ensure profitability is to achieve superior underwriting. According to a survey conducted by insurance consulting firm The Nolan Company 78 percent of insurance executive respondents have cited “investing in analytics” as their top priority in underwriting. Ernst and Young recently called out workers’ compensation as showing promising signs of driving underwriting profits and the leading companies who are leveraging advanced data and analytics to get there.It’s not an issue of underwriter incapability but rather how to properly allocate their time to target the correct group of at-risk policies and the necessary speed with which they need to receive the most accurate information. For work comp underwriters predictive analytics is a powerful tool they use to make superior risk and pricing decisions. Those companies who prioritize using innovative technologies and analytics create positive selection for their book of business and win profitable market share.As more carriers turn to the power of analytical tools innovation has quickly evolved into a necessity. A recent report by Celent titled “IT Spending in Insurance: A Global perspective” found that insurance IT spending across the globe will increase from $162.1 billion to $176.7 billion by 2016. Along those same lines Gartner research found that investments in analytic applications and advanced analytics totaled $14.4 billion in 2013 up 8 percent from 2012 ($13.3 billion). Dan Sommer research director at Gartner noted the analytics market is on the cusp of a series of tipping points “which will facilitate unprecedented interest and adoption of analytics.” The pressure is heightened even further with technology and e-commerce giants (who already have a solid understanding and access to data) such as Google Facebook and most recently Overstock turning their attention to insurance.As insurance becomes increasingly more data-driven the competition for market share increases as well. If insurance follows the same path as the credit card industry companies who adapt to new technologies will emerge as market leaders while others run the risk of dying out from adverse selection. How are you ensuring that your company stays ahead of the curve? 
 It’s not the way I normally begin the work week. On Monday morning I drove to the public high school Denver School of Science and Technology to award our first scholarship for Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge. When I got there I learned it was senior ditch day – certainly brought me back to the pranks I pulled at 18 years old. But I digress. Our first scholarship recipient Daniel Yedidovich is a very impressive young man. The insurance industry desperately needs to find ways to reach this young generation and get them excited about insurance. Hopefully this scholarship fund we raised at the 2014 Insurance Analytics Symposium is one small token to raise awareness and mobilize the insurance industry to do more.Check out Daniel receiving his scholarship award.Also: Valen promotes insurance careers to nation’s top business leaders.  
 Last week I wrote an article for Change the Equation the nation’s premier organization that brings together top CEOs to connect the dots between the workforce pipeline and education – specifically STEM education (Science Technology Engineering & Math). This was a great opportunity to raise awareness about exciting career opportunities in insurance to the country’s top business leaders. You can read the article below.Point of View: Dax CraigOriginally published in the Change the Equation NOW Newsletter April 15 2014Industries are now littered with examples of market leading companies that suffered or went under because they ignored new ways of thinking and innovative technology. Blockbuster comes to mind as a recent casualty. What companies like Netflix Google and Capital One did to change their industries so fundamentally was actually quite simple. They let data rule and as a result looked at their market much differently than the “tried and true” approaches of the past. Being analytically-driven was the catalyst that allowed these companies to upend the competitive landscape in their respective industries and come out on top.The really interesting trend in these examples is the makeup of the people who drove this change. Young bright minds proficient in math and science have had an enormous impact on the way we live our lives today. As a matter of fact we see this trend of evolving business models playing out in our industry right now. Valen Analytics serves the insurance industry with advanced data and analytics that allow insurers to better match an individual policy risk with the right coverage and premium amount. Analytics has already changed the game in personal auto insurance with the likes of Progressive and GEICO and now it’s taking hold in other types of insurance.Insurance carriers are facing a threat to their traditional business models where investment income was the primary means of creating shareholder value. The current investment environment is driving a sea change and companies must now yield substantially more profit from their underwriting operations. The problem for the insurance industry is two-fold. First while all industries face an aging workforce insurance is being hit harder than most. In fact 50 percent of the current workforce will retire in the next 15 years. There are hundreds of thousands of positions that need to be filled and with half the labor force being made up by Millennials during this same time frame it’s clear the industry will need to recruit from the younger generations. However the insurance industry isn’t currently positioned very well to attract young bright analytical talent. And that’s what brought Valen to Change the Equation.Working with Change the Equation we started an initiative called Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge. It’s a way to coalesce an industry response on two fronts: a) making sure the next generation of talent is aware of the opportunity to bring innovative thinking to insurance and b) to give the industry a seat at the table as business leaders proactively influence our educational system to produce the future workforce pipeline we need. Even though we’ve just begun the response has been phenomenal. Many insurance carriers like Change the Equation member State Farm are glad to see a way forward in solving a legitimate talent crisis. Change the Equation’s leadership is unparalleled in being able to bring together the nation’s business leaders to drive meaningful and scalable change in STEM learning. We know our partnership with Change the Equation will serve our customers now and well into the future. 
 There appears to be violent agreement that 2014 is the year of advanced technology data and analytics in insurance. Of course these kinds of prognostications don’t sneak up on anyone. A convergence of growing organizational eagerness and sophisticated tools is allowing momentum to build for the next generation of underwriting to emerge. Read the reportMarket dynamics are always an important factor in what ultimately makes the cut from strategic planning to implementation. The investment environment increasing regulatory pressure and rising costs are influencing a more analytical approach to underwriting in order to increase profitability. With its historically volatile performance homeowners insurance will be a particular focus in personal lines this year as carriers adopt new approaches to drive profitability through underwriting.What homeowners carriers are focused on now is looking more closely at their non-catastrophe risks.According to an Insurance Journal study only 39 percent of total homeowners losses were catastrophe-related. The lion’s share of losses at 61 percent are non-cat related. The question then becomes: Are carriers spending enough time and resources developing underwriting strategies for their non-cat losses? As an example Valen breaks down risks as mitigatable versus non-mitigatable as a way to help carriers reduce losses within their control. This shift to addressing losses based on a carrier’s ability to affect the outcome and drive down loss ratio will grow in 2014.2014 will provide a focus on shoring up the foundation needed to enable insurers of all shapes and sizes to become more analytically-driven. And while carriers make progress securing the necessary talent needed to succeed is a growing and industry-wide concern.Check out Valen’s 2014 Outlook Report for Personal Lines for additional insights to help improve your underwriting performance. 
 Each time we sign up a new customer it’s exciting because we see the momentum building for data and analytics within underwriting. The adoption of analytics in commercial lines in particular is rapidly increasing and becoming more mainstream every day.We commend FHM’s desire to augment their underwriting expertise with advanced data and analytics to improve underwriting profitability. FHM now has the solution in place to help underwriters managers and executives take specific actions to improve their overall risk quality.By adopting the Predict component of InsureRight Platform FHM will gain access to transactional model deployment for risk selection and pricing accuracy. Predict empowers underwriters with enhanced visibility into individual risks transforming how they interact with predictive scores. Supported by Valen’s contributory database the InsureRight Platform continues to be recognized as an industry standard and has seen tremendous momentum in the workers’ compensation industry.We’re honored to work with FHM and welcome them to Valen. 
 Today I hope to garner a moment of your time to consider an issue we all face: attracting the best talent. The headlines about the talent crisis in insurance are glaring with one study citing we will have a gap of 400000 positions to fill by the year 2020. This problem is hitting at the same moment carriers are retooling their underwriting operations to become more profitable which will require more data and analytics talent.Because we’re competing with other industries we recently announced our Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge initiative to promote exciting career opportunities in insurance to the next generation.I recently joined a CEO-led initiative of leading companies connecting the dots between STEM education and the workforce called Change the Equation. It’s the nation’s premier organization boasting 100 CEO members from companies like Intel Accenture Xerox DuPont and Time Warner.Please join me on November 14th for a web conference with Change the Equation’s senior staff. It will be an informative session on proven strategies to address our massive talent shortage. Executive recruiting firm The Jacobson Group will provide the latest statistics on how the insurance industry is doing in regards to talent recruitment.It’s time we find a solution to our massive talent shortage by working together. I hope you can join us. 
