 The influence data and technology have had on the industries that leverage them is undeniable. However some insurers still believe — even in 2019 — that their industry is somehow insulated from those effects. Unfortunately those who still hold onto those beliefs will likely find themselves facing some hard truths.Technology and the innovation economy will have an increasingly significant impact on the way insurance is handled and those who embrace a data-driven future will be the ones leading the pack. In the coming year (and beyond) insurers will be pressed to answer a variety of questions unique to the digital age the most pertinent of which may be these three:• How will work be defined when the nature of employment is rapidly changing?• What’s the right way to cover people with income that comes from several sources that change on a daily basis?• How should insurance handle the shift away from traditional ownership?Technology and data will influence the way all three of these questions are answered in one way or another. By embracing each insurers can open themselves up to more innovative ways to serve and cover their customers.Insuring Modern EconomiesRecent innovations haven’t just transformed existing economies. They’ve created brand new ones all of which already affect the insurance industry in some fashion. Here are two of the biggest.Automation: The automation economy will have arguably the biggest impact on the insurance industry because its effects will be wide-ranging. A McKinsey study found that half of existing workplace responsibilities can be automated meaning that the ripple effect of automation has only just begun.Automation can also be used directly within the industry to improve administrative efficiency and overall accuracy. Amazon has already embraced machine learning using it to modernize its warehouse. And while automation can be a boost to workplace efficiency it’ll also drastically change the nature of risk in the workplace.Furthermore automation could expand the scope of auto insurance and worker’s compensation though what that ultimately looks like is unknown right now. When it comes to the automation economy nothing is free from its impact.Access: It won’t be long before the sharing and subscription services usurp traditional notions of ownership. Companies like Spotify and Netflix have already changed how we access music and movies but we’re also starting to see other attitudes about ownership change.Need proof? Just look at auto and home ownership. In auto’s case a Lyft study found that 250000 of its customers got rid of their cars in 2017 in favor of ride-share services. As for homeownership U.S. Census data reports that those numbers declined in 90 percent of U.S. cities from 2000 to 2015. Each statistic illustrates that ownership isn’t as alluring or attainable to American consumers as it once was.The access economy is also challenging the definition of work. According to Gallup 57 million Americans draw some form of income from the gig economy. The continued rise of independent contracting means how those businesses cover those employees will need to change as well.Insurers need to adapt to these changing definitions and economies or face the risk of being outpaced by the competition. The best way to do this is to embrace innovative economies to assess risk and process claims. Just as data and technology drive these new economies they will also fuel the insurance industry — and those who fail to get on board will soon find themselves left in the dust.Never miss the latest news. Follow us on LinkedIn. 
 If asked most people could probably tell you why oil is considered so valuable.Yes it plays a crucial role in nearly every part of our daily lives but it’s also kickstarted so many innovations that could never have otherwise been realized. In the digital era we live in there’s another resource whose value is similarly unquestioned: data.In the same way oil fuels our cars and homes data is the catalyst behind the next generation of innovative solutions like AI and blockchain. Consequently some industries and companies have already recognized data’s current and continuing value. Intel for example now leverages data to find new ways to grow its business in the wake of declining PC sales. However data’s worth isn’t exclusive to the tech sector. Other industries — namely insurance — also stand to benefit from the myriad innovative solutions data brings to the table.Adopting data-driven strategies has the potential to revolutionize insurance providing paths to greater operational efficiency better claims processing and more precise risk appraisal. Going forward those that can harness data’s power to fuel every aspect of business can have a leg up on their competition while those who stick to older methods will quickly find themselves on running on fumes.How Data Consortiums Can Fuel InsurersWith data’s importance to the future of insurance already well-established how can insurers effectively incorporate it into their respective workflows? Traditionally underwriting and rating decisions utilize aggregated datasets that identify trends yet don’t offer micro-level information that can support real-time decision making.Primary data sources on the other hand help paint a clearer picture of customer behavior. It’s why many companies that rely on these large datasets look for transactional and behavioral data to supplement the information they already have. Thankfully primary sources are more readily available than they used to be meaning insurers should theoretically be reaping the benefits of more granular data.However a Valen Analytics study discovered that 60 percent of insurers already deal with lengthy production backlogs and difficulty finding analytics talent proof that data offers new and unique efficiency challenges that most insurers aren’t ready to tackle. For one the sheer volume of sources makes picking the optimal repository a daunting task; additionally sifting through these numerous sources can exhaust an already overextended Analytics department.These issues — and others — cause headaches that many insurers are ill-equipped to deal with leading many to stick to the old manual way of doing things. This is where data consortiums come in to be the jolt an operation needs.Make Your Insurance Operation GoConsortiums have long existed in other industries and are gaining traction in P/C to manage and assess large pools of shared data  then offer this information to insurance companies. This takes the administrative and IT burden off insurers’ shoulders while still providing all the requisite value.Insurance companies don’t necessarily have to be data barons to reap the benefits of more accurate claims and better underwriting. To take advantage of the fuel that will drive the insurance industry in the future insurers should look into what a data consortiums could do for them.Data is the here and now for forward-thinking insurance companies. Read Valen Analytics’ 2019 Outlook Report to learn more about where this invaluable resource will take the industry in the coming year (and beyond). 
 Data’s usefulness to the insurance business is unquestioned. But it wasn’t until the 21st century that its full potential was discovered and realized. With the right tools savvy insurers can use data and analytics to guide their strategies in order to amplify the customer experience and identify growth opportunities.While data’s value is obvious to nearly all insurers what’s less obvious is how to actually leverage the insights from their data. As Harvard economics professor Sendhil Mullainathan has said“The problem with data is that it says a lot but it also says nothing. To understand why something is happening we have to engage in both forensics and guesswork.” The presence of a data set doesn’t instantly provide insurers with a course of action to take.Data Barriers Insurers Must OvercomeToday’s sophisticated analytics can at times feel like a code that constantly needs to be cracked. To realize data’s true potential insurers need to find ways to bypass those blockages. These are three common obstacles many insurers will encounter in their mission to pull actionable insights from data:1. Lack of qualified analystsAnalytics isn’t a “set it and forget it” proposition. It requires skilled humans to contextualize information in order to properly apply it which presents a problem because the talent needed for this sort of job is in short supply.In fact a recent Valen Analytics survey concluded that 75 percent of insurers struggle to attract the talent needed to manage predictive models.The issue is that analytics and insurance experts don’t see where their specialties merge. Without qualified data analysts there to translate it’s easy for insurers to become overwhelmed by a sea of data and incapable of comprehending it.2. Trouble with legacy dataA swarm of incoming external data can be overwhelming enough but an even bigger hurdle comes when insurers try to integrate legacy information. This data on past experience is an essential part of creating a predictive model but when it comes from an array of sources it tends to bring a variety of complications.Some figures may be incomplete while others may be redundant or actively contradict one another. For smaller insurance companies sifting through this clutter of data and turning it into something useful can seem like an insurmountable task.3. Making data actionableEven the most sophisticated and accurate models can be difficult to translate into decision support in the real world. The connections between raw information and practical application are rarely obvious to the untrained eye. Data has the potential to be both a preemptive tool and a resource after the fact so it’s important to know what you want from data and how to get it.These are some of the more common challenges that prevent insurers from fully embracing analytics. But even in their absences an effective implementation requires a measured approach and a clear strategy.As the insurance industry matures its data use must also mature in order to bring more value to the customer. However antiquated systems supporting new technology leave these insurers floundering and wondering how to act next.Valen Analytics can help insurers take the next step into this brave new world without crumbling under the weight. Download our latest whitepaper to learn how your company can best conquer these data challenges head-on and build a healthy and vibrant analytics ecosystem. 
 Back in 2001 famed technologist and futurist Ray Kurzweil boldly proclaimed that the human rate of progress was doubling. He added that by the time the 21st century ends the progress would feel like 20000 years’ worth of transition instead of 100.At the time Kurzweil’s statement sounded a bit dubious. But with how rapidly technology has transformed over the last two decades it now seems that the world’s ability to change quickly was drastically underestimated.The fact is that we live in an age defined by acceleration and this incredible pace of change has exceeded many industries’ capacity to handle it. Changes that once took an entire generation for people to adapt to now take 10 years. The possibilities of this rapidly changing landscape are endless and so of course is the risk that comes with it.The Far Reaches of RiskIt should come as no surprise that as technology rapidly transforms risk shifts along with it. Advancement is a double-edged sword. It can simultaneously create a greater level of safety for the status quo and change the very nature of risk forcing insurers to build new coverage solutions to address previously unforeseen concerns.For instance autonomous vehicles might be safer drivers than humans but they’re also vulnerable to cyberattacks and malware. In many cases driverless cars (and rapidly changing tech like them) blur the lines of where risk even falls. For proof just take a look at the sharing economy. It’s less than a decade old yet it’s raised major questions in terms of how coverage works. If for example you drive for Uber or Lyft is your car classified as a work vehicle or a personal one? And does the coverage shift throughout the day as drivers turn their ride-sharing service on and off? Insurance companies have to find answers for these types of problems on a daily basis.It’s an understandably complex and — for many insurance leaders — intimidating concept. However while progress may be rapid it’s not entirely unpredictable. For insurers the future has the potential to be bright for those who remain engaged with the changing landscape of risk. Here’s what those leaders can expect:1. Humans will gain a deeper understanding of risk.While technology’s race toward the future provides ample opportunity for confusion it also provides the tools to parse through that confusion and come to a better understanding of risk. Telematics machine learning data analytics and more all give insurers much greater insight into how risk touches every aspect of life.Commercial auto insurers are dipping their toes into telematics to explore how they can be applied to evaluate individual driving behaviors. Companies can examine individual driving habits to see how those routines inform the kinds of services and discounts they can offer customers. Instances like these are only going to become more common. This type of granular data sharing will have a direct impact on how coverage is constructed and provided in the future.2. The way humans and technology relate to risk will change.As automation continues to be integrated into daily life coverage will have to properly account for and balance the effect computers and humans each have on rates.Amazon has more than 100000 automated and robotic systems integrated into its operations working with human employees to maintain efficiency. The online retailer has almost certainly had to consider how to provide coverage to cover its employees while they work in tandem with heavy machinery something companies in similar situations will also have to consider.Regulation for this as you can imagine is still being crafted. Insurers will need to make sure they continue to stay up-to-date on how and when machines can take over from humans and how that will affect risk.3. Customer service will look a little different.Thanks to the Internet of Things insurers will be able to learn about incidents in real time and process claims before a policyholder even gets involved. These instantaneous notifications are clearly useful for insurance companies but used correctly they can also be a major selling point for consumers.Machine learning could have a similar impact on customer service. It can be used to pinpoint a highly customized plan for every individual without the customer having to do most of the groundwork.This age of acceleration is intimidating and it certainly shows no signs of slowing down. Leadership however should look at all this innovation as an opportunity not a threat. Insurers can leverage tech to improve the customer experience from quote to claim and as technology advances so will the tools that help insurers understand risk.There’s no denying that infrastructure demographics and risk are all changing at breakneck speeds. To keep up insurers must not just follow change — they need to grab it by its horns and embrace the new before it becomes old hat.Are you in need of more guidance on how to prepare for the changing landscape of risk? Download Valen Analytics’ “2018 Outlook Report: An Industry Divide” for insights on how to adapt your approach. 
 In Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s novel “A Study in Scarlet” the singular Sherlock Holmes proclaimed “It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data.” That’s not only sound advice for sleuths but it’s also wisdom that many insurers should take to heart.Data is a crucial component of the insurance business but as any underwriter will tell you it’s also wildly asymmetrical. No matter the case being handled insurers never know everything about the risk they’re writing and are often at the mercy of information that like a game of Telephone flows from the policyholder to the agent and then finally to the insurer.Even insurers that build in-house models can fall victim to the limitations of their data. That’s especially true if the insurer isn’t a massive company or is unable to leverage a consortium to flesh out a data set. A consortium — like the one we offer at Valen Analytics — provides a wealth of detailed transactional data that can fill in information gaps insurers might have and prevent them from making capital mistakes of their own.Let the Numbers Even the OddsThe potential a more robust data set has to even out the balance of power between insurers and policyholders isn’t some pie-in-the-sky theory. The success insurers have had leveraging Valen’s data consortium to support their analytics programs show that it’s an investment worth making. Here are a few reasons a program built on data with greater breadth and depth can be such an asset to an insurer:It more accurately matches risk to price. When properly built and utilized advanced data analytics help ensure that policyholders are correctly charged for the risk they present. Underwriter and agent influences combine with data science to reach a more nuanced decision.Metromile for example has instituted a pay-per-mile business model to provide customers with more affordable car insurance rates. The insurer uses data to calculate how much risk a driver poses and informs agents and underwriters. The approach not only implements transparency into pricing but it also provides a more customer-friendly insurance experience.Slice Labs used a similar concept to turn data-driven pricing into an entirely new business model. The outfit provides insurance for the Airbnb set. Hosts pay for only the length of time a guest is staying to receive coverage for things like property damage high energy costs and infestation.  It can help identify fraud.Getting rid of fraud benefits everyone but regularly auditing every single policy on the books is simply unrealistic. While there are common methods to catch major instances of premium fraud many smaller but still harmful incidents go unseen.However fraud analytics powered by a robust data set can perform checks and raise red flags much more efficiently than humans can which can have a huge impact on a company’s bottom line. Extensive data sets can also be used to improve customer experience specifically when it comes to identifying patterns of fraud and areas where fast claim processing can boost a customer’s satisfaction rating.Insurers can use the existing data collected by consortiums to pinpoint those trends and reduce the need for additional questions and scrutiny when the policyholder is already in a vulnerable position. All these data points can be used to resolve claims fraud in an efficient convenient and clear manner.  It can triage claims more quickly accurately.Data analytics can be a boon to claims adjusters ensuring they don’t overlook something important while reducing cycle times by as much as 15 percent according to a LexisNexis study. They help adjusters more effectively triage claims and use more customized experiences to significantly improve claimant outcomes and get them back to full health faster.An enhanced data science outlook can provide adjusters with a clearer picture of whether a specific claim could lead to large losses. In the long run data analytics can ultimately be a cost-saving measure that allows insurers to anticipate risk and control claim costs.Insurance has a reputation as a necessary evil. According to research by Ernst & Young 57 percent of consumers are unhappy with their insurance. People use it only during times of pain and even then are reluctant to submit a claim for fear that their rates will increase. As insurers become more data-driven increased fairness and transparency can change that perception. With data analytics insurers can become better acquainted with their customers and use that knowledge to provide high-quality relevant and cost-effective services. Capital mistakes are ill-affordable for insurers or policyholders. Let data close the book on them.If you’re interested in finding ways to use data more deliberately and effectively click on this link to see the number of solutions Valen Analytics provides.  
 Advancement is a double-edged sword. It can simultaneously create a greater level of safety for the status quo and change the very nature of risk.﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ View as one page 
 Valen’s third annual ROI study highlights the importance of goal-driven analytics.Susan the new head of underwriting for a regional insurer was brought in to shake things up. Her new company had a mandate to grow but was suffering from high loss ratios and a team resistant to change. As the head actuary of a top-ten insurer Tom knew he had a problem. The management team was bullish on growth in workers’ compensation and they often had to contend with a known analytical competitor. Unfortunately they didn’t have the data required to build a predictive model that would enable profitable growth into new states and he couldn’t take the risk of suffering the new business penalty with high loss ratios. And finally there’s Bill. Bill had an expense problem a growing concern of many insurers and needed to focus his limited underwriting resources on policies requiring their attention. Straight-through processing driven by analytics was the only way to achieve lower costs without negatively impacting profitability.We hear these stories often. As you read the results of our third annual ROI study the most important takeaway is that starting with a specific business objective is the only way to achieve market leading results like what we’re reporting below.ROI Study ResultsValen customers are bucking the trend and continue to grab market share demonstrating the undeniable value of applied analytics. In the third year of our annual ROI study the results once again show our customers are able to outperform the market and grow at almost 3x the industry average.Here’s what we learned.Insurers with profitability issues reduced loss ratio 35 pointsand continue to beat the marketFor the subset of customers with profitability problems (primarily with a loss ratio greater than 60) the results are swift and significant. Collectively the group improved loss ratio by 21 points within the first year. It’s also worth noting that the advantage of predictive analytics did not end when the immediate danger went away. With data-driven decision-making now integrated into their underwriting workflows these same carriers continued to remain profitable. As a result this group of Valen customers outperformed the market experiencing loss ratio improvement of 32 points when compared to the rest of the industry at 17.9. That’s roughly 1.9X better.Valen customers outperform the market every year since 2012Insurers evolve their analytic capabilities to consistently beat market profitability.The second part of the analysis looked at the trends of a larger group of Valen customers those with a mixed set of goals including loss ratio improvement and growth. As the graph shows they collectively maintain a competitive edge in loss ratio every year. Even in 2017 measuring against a significant market improvement Valen customers solidly remain 4 pts ahead of the game.These insurers have improved risk selection and pricing helping them both protect their current business and win new business. This opens the door for them to undertake aggressive growth strategies and lower costs through greater efficiency all while maintaining a loss ratio advantage.Valen customers experience top-line premium growtheven when industry growth stalls.Making profitable pricing and risk selection decisions allows insurers to grab market share even when the market is flat.Finally we looked at how Valen customers’ growth compares to the market. Looking at 2017 the industry has leveled off but Valen customers continue to grow aggressively. At 53% compared to 18% Valen customers were growing at a rate 2.9x top-line market growth.This study demonstrates that whatever your goal analytics can support it. Whether the aim is to grow improve profitability protect market share or reduce expenses analytics provides a superior way to achieve it.To see our latest Infographic and learn more about this study visit our Applied Analytics Resource Center. 
 The speed the climb the drop and the turns…rollercoasters are an exhilarating thrill! But if the rollercoaster is commercial auto some insurers will be happy to see the end of this ride.It’s no secret the commercial auto line is still feeling the pain of increased severity and rate inadequacy. Nearly a year ago Carrier Management stressed this point citing higher litigation costs and larger loss incidents as causes for unfavorable claim trends. Despite rate increases 2016 was the worst year for underwriting performance since 2001 with combined ratios growing 1.6% to 110.4% from the previous year. A recent A.M. Best report reaffirmed this and found 2017 to be equally as difficult with rate increases of 5.4 percent 6.1 percent and 7.3 percent in the first three quarters as insurers tried to match the pace of losses. The report continues with the grim outlook “there will be more pain – owing to factors such as distracted driving and attorney involvement- before insurers realize any long-term gains from focused underwriting and pricing efforts.”While the uncertainty of the situation may be unsettling about 20% of commercial auto carriers are turning an underwriting profit on this line. What do they know that others don’t and what are they doing differently? More importantly will it remain at 20%? Or 18 months from now will we see the number of profitable insurers grow?If we take personal auto as an example there are several indicators of how this will likely play out. For the past six years profitable personal auto insurers have attributed their success to the adoption of data analytics. To beat adverse selection they have effectively leveraged data to choose the right risks for the right price. This example has also played out effectively in work comp with the top carriers vying for market share over the last 5 years.Independent rating agencies like AM Best and Fitch agree: insurers that fail to adopt the advanced analytics and enhanced data to make competitive decisions will be unable to compete. It boils down to those that have incorporated analytics and those who have not. It’s up to insurers to face uncertainty head-on and make investments in the future.Learn how one commercial auto insurer fought adverse selection and improved their loss ratio by 29 points in our case study.   
 With the Olympics in full swing the Valen Analytics team enjoyed a real treat a couple weeks ago with a private tour at the USOC Training Facility in Colorado Springs from VP of U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Foundation Charlie Huebner.  Here’s a few nuggets from Olympians for #WednesdayWisdom.Charlie is the epitome of leadership – his passion is infectious. He clearly articulates the focused vision strategy and execution of the USOC. I was particularly struck by how data-driven the decisions are at USOC in terms of deciding which sports to invest in how to evaluate the potential for individual performers to win on the world stage and where to allocate limited resources. As Charlie explained the USOC’s budget is substantially less than that of other countries. The USOC has a $250M operating budget compared to the billions spent by the governments of China and Russia.While they leverage analytics to drive strategic investment decisions they don’t lack heart. Charlie remarked “We’re not managing widgets here. We’re managing the hopes and dreams of the best athletes in the world. What we decide has an enormous impact on individuals.” The average income of a U.S. Olympic athlete is just $20000 and only a small handful develop lucrative sponsorships. These athletes are definitely not in it for the money. They dedicate years of their lives to pursue their passion and achieve incredible heights.Our whole team was inspired by the visit and moved by the energy Charlie shared during our few hours with him. Reflecting on the experience I thought about how well Charlie laid out what we all read in business books on effective leadership and high performing teams. I won’t do his storytelling justice in this post but wanted to share what I took away.The Why: The USOC helps athletes prepare over 4 years for seconds of competition.The Goal: Invest in athletes and sports where we have the best chance to medal.The How: Let data and information inform your successes and failures and guide where to steer the ship. The most critical decisions are determining what to keep doing what to scrap and what will work if you try to execute another way.The Tough Reality: Sometimes U.S. athletes at the top of their game are unlikely to achieve the set goal of winning a medal and will not get the resources that others will. It could be the result of the competitive landscape and assessing that our best isn’t enough to win against athletes from other countries. It could be the unfortunate reality that other countries allow their athletes to cheat by doping in a particular sport and we can’t overcome that obstacle.Taking Risks: There are several cases where the USOC decides conditions have changed and it’s the right time to take a chance and invest in a sport where we’ve struggled. In those situations most recently with boxing and cycling the USOC is incredibly thoughtful about the dedication and investment in tools coaches and other resources that will set up our athletes for success. The new boxing facility and coaching staff led by Billy Walsh is case in point. As is an enclosed training room to help cyclists and triathletes equipped with cycles and treadmills that can change 25k feet in altitude and mimic extreme weather and humidity conditions.  The Culture: Building a team of A players requires that you compete with passion and heart. Once you seed the team with top performers you begin the journey of bringing more people of that same caliber. Charlie shared the challenge in getting professional basketball players interested in the Olympics until the 1992 Dream Team. Professional players began flocking to join the team. The Execution: At the end of the day it all comes down to execution. If Charlie said it once he said it a dozen times: “We can’t outspend so we out execute.” He showed us so many examples of the little things that add up to a world-class Olympic team that shines in every Olympic Games. They ‘out execute’ on the smallest details of designing the training facility and teaching athletes how to shop for and cook food in remote destinations around the world to chartering a plane in Sochi to avoid antics with Russian customs and sending in construction crews to Rio to improve the living conditions for athletes. Details as small and important as shipping in better mattresses are meticulously planned and executed. It’s valuable perspective to see what goes into supporting athletes living on such a humble income to give them the best chance at stretching themselves to be the best in the world. Those medal winners get to enjoy a moment of glory after years of unbelievable hard work and dedication. Taking that same focused vision passion for the work attention to detail and commitment to flawless execution is what defines the winners and losers in business too.Kirstin Marr is CMO of Valen Analytics and has a passion for building great tech companies and promoting the impact of the brightest marketing professionals. 
 For a unique twist on #FunFriday during #InsuranceCareersMonth let’s go inside the cultures of successful tech companies. Because insurance organizations are in a state of flux as they evolve to become more data and analytically-driven I thought it would be helpful to expose a few trade secrets of game-changing teams.Innovators on the leading edge have some common personality characteristics. Bravado moxie and irreverence are a few words that fit the bill. Naturally everyone in business must be resilient and tough to succeed regardless of the type of company – being competitive and remaining on top is not for the faint of heart. Yet there’s something different and special about technology leaders. When I use the term ‘leaders’ in this context I don’t mean people with executive titles. I mean individuals who have the smarts the vision and the gumption to change an industry. When these individuals organize into teams they become pioneers they push each other to go rogue and defy the status quo and they are proud of it.Teams that push the envelope live the mantra work hard and play hard. Working hard and driving an industry to new heights requires brutal honesty with yourself and your colleagues. You have to trust each other and push back on one another – which usually means there’s a healthy dose of sarcasm flying around in email IMs and internal meetings. Poking fun and prodding each other definitely serves as a release valve in the pressure cooker environment of leading tech companies. Early on work-life balance is a laughable joke. A great leader I admire is Andy Zurcher who I worked with at HomeAdvisor. HomeAdvisor (previously called ServiceMagic) changed the home improvement industry by building the predominant online marketplace to connect homeowners with reputable service providers. Andy led the product team in HomeAdvisor’s formative years and he used to say “Every Friday night I go home completely drained from the week’s work. When I look back at what we had accomplished since Monday and I’m always amazed at our progress. It’s truly remarkable.”For this #FunFriday question why is the ability to banter with your colleagues a key secret ingredient to innovation in the workplace? When it’s reciprocal in a team that enjoys mutual respect it’s a sign of authentic trust. When evaluating any team I always look for signs that they have a good time with each other and don’t take themselves too seriously. In my view it’s a pivotal key to success.The play hard part of the equation is important too. Valen’s parent company Insurity just rolled out new core values – and one of them is to Celebrate Together. We fully embrace that value at Valen and just last week had a memorable outing to celebrate record-breaking sales growth in 2017. We enjoyed a real treat staying at the Broadmoor in Colorado Springs tore it up at bowling and the singing piano bar the Golden Bee. The next morning while a tad slow from the previous evening’s festivities we enjoyed an incredible private tour at the USOC Training Facility from their VP of U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Foundation Charlie Huebner. Given the Olympics just kicked off the timing and meaning of the visit was special.For next week’s #MondayMotivation I’ll share leadership insights from Charlie Huebner that will inspire you – he is remarkable. In the meantime enjoy your #FunFriday with some good-natured humor with your team members! It just might catapult your company into an industry leader.Kirstin Marr is CMO of Valen Analytics and has a passion for building great tech companies and promoting the impact of the brightest marketing professionals. 
 We’re celebrating our 10 year anniversary with the inaugural Valen Analytics Summit in Vail Colorado. The goal of the summit is to create a peer forum of insurance executives managers and those with strategic oversight and responsibility for implementing data and analytics initiatives within underwriting. This is the time for property & casualty carriers to create a competitive edge.Keynote speaker Nigel Morris managing partner of QED Investors and co-founder of Capital One said it best. “In the late 80’s and early 90’s Capital One was at the vanguard of a revolution deploying data-driven strategies in the credit card industry” said Nigel Morris. “I’m thrilled to participate in Valen’s Summit because I believe that insurance carriers increasingly have the same opportunity to grow the size and profitability of their businesses by more specifically meeting their customer’s needs.”Scheduled for February 19-21 2014 at the Westin Resort near Vail Colorado this three-day event will present a series of panels and keynote speeches from industry luminaries during a pivotal moment for insurance executives in light of declining returns and the risk of market consolidation. Early registration has opened today on the Valen website.Check out the schedule of sessionsTempt yourself with our schedule of activities. Valen’s home is Colorado and we couldn’t help but mix business with some Rocky Mountain Winter fun!Register 
 This week PropertyCasualty360.com covered our 2014 Outlook: Commercial Lines report and summed it up well stating that commercial insurers are at an analytics crossroads. The article goes on to say that using analytics may be the determining factor in whether carriers suffer from adverse selection or benefit from creating positive risk selection.Also this week Insurance Networking News reported a study from Novarica that large P&C carriers are doubling the big data technology deployments and pilots as compared to last year. “From the research Novarica concludes that while big data is still an emerging area large P&C insurers are leading the way in building the infrastructure to support future big data operations.”These are the types of signals that the industry needs to pay close attention to because it mimics what we’ve seen in other industries when data and analytics gain momentum.The bigger players can really change the game when they start investing in and implementing advanced analytical tools. Everyone needs to take notice and be ready to compete using these new technologies even though they don’t necessarily have the same resources.Read our report which contains both expert insights and practical suggestions to move forward. 
 The property and casualty industry is in a period of flux facing significant challenges to traditional business models and the reliance on investment income. When new business models emerge it’s wise to take a step back and learn from other industries that have evolved in ways that look similar to what we see happening in commercial lines. One of the most important trends to watch beginning in 2014 is market share consolidation. As commercial carriers increase their adoption of advanced data and analytics history tells us that the more progressive companies will garner significant market share.In addition there are significant market and regulatory dynamics at play that will also drive the need for new operating models. Fortunately there are proven methods and strategies to propel individual companies and the industry forward. After working closely with dozens of commercial lines insurers over the past nine years Valen’s 2014 Outlook highlights several major challenges along with valuable insight to help guide underwriting strategy and the process of becoming more analytically-driven.Read the full report 
 Let’s face it. Commercial lines underwriting is undergoing a transformation. And underwriters need better tools to make more informed decisions that drive profitable growth and reduce losses.  I recently came across a panel topic for an upcoming conference called “Enabling the Underwriter of the Future”.  A candid description of the session called out the fact that commercial lines is essentially at a crossroads and it’s time to move forward with data technology and tools that will attract the next generation of underwriting talent to the industry.At the same time Insurance Networking News just published a great article in their latest issue called “The New Data-Driven Insurer”. In it they detail a report from analyst firm SMA showing where P&C insurers are increasing their technology investments to improve overall performance. The top area for technology investment in 2013 is data and analytics initiatives that support underwriting with 55% of insurers increasing spending. Other investments are going to support marketing (46%) and claims (37%).XL Group’s IT leader Kurt Schulenburg framed up the underwriting challenge this way: “If we wanted to go back and look at all the risks that have shared characteristics we’d have to assemble a bunch of Excel spreadsheets and emails…When you work in a manual environment all you’re able to use is the experience of the underwriter. What we are trying to get to is a combination model where we use the experience of the underwriter but we augment that with better analytics and more data from prior years.”We couldn’t agree more. Underwriters bring valuable expertise that needs to be supported by allowing them to leverage data from claims underwriting agents and pricing. And it needs to be seamless and real time within the underwriting workflow. The underwriter of the future will be able to unlock the power of data and analytics to aggressively price the best risks avoid the poor ones and run at a profit that’s sustainable and supports growth.If your organization is on a journey to become more analytically driven use Valen’s Analytical Readiness checklist to ask the tough questions and facilitate dialogue internally with your team. 
 We know it’s not easy when you first start using predictive analytics in underwriting. That’s why Valen joined USAA Berkshire and analyst firm SMA on an expert panel discussion about implementing predictive analytics in underwriting this week at the IASA 2013 conference. Using real case studies we explained how predictive modeling improves underwriting profitability. And most importantly we talked candidly about the obstacles carriers will face when introducing predictive scores to underwriters.Rich Kirstie Chief Technical Officer and Chief Actuary for Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Companies described the paradigm shift an underwriting organization goes through when learning to use predictive analytics. At first underwriters are often resistant and look for ways to poke holes in a predictive model. They find individual policy scores that contradict their experience and show it as “proof” that the model doesn’t work. He offered key recommendations to counter this initial hurdle:Ease your underwriters into using predictive scores over time. Don’t be too rigid at first until you learn how to combine the power of predictive modeling with the expertise and experience of your underwriting talent.Secure both senior management and middle management commitment. If senior management doesn’t buy in the project won’t move forward. If middle management doesn’t get on board they won’t be as helpful overcoming individual underwriter adoption issues.Karen Moritz Manager of Data Science Analysts for USAA agreed. She added specific things carriers can do to help provide context for how predictive modeling helps underwriters focus on the things they do that add the most value.Hold focus groups with your underwriters and ask them what can be done to make them more efficient through automation. When introducing new technology like predictive modeling tie it back to the feedback you received in the focus group sessions.Make the business case for using models with data and technology that clearly shows the financial benefits.Dax Craig Valen’s CEO offered a final piece of advice. Underwriters view predictive scores as a “black box”. That’s why we include the reasons behind the score. By giving underwriters a view into other policies that have a similar score it provides valuable context they need to understand how policies are scored so they can make informed decisions and have productive conversations with agents.What have you found that helps underwriters find value in predictive models? 
 For the past couple of weeks we’ve addressed how a lack of visibility and current pricing techniques are hurting underwriting profitability. And when executives talk with us about how to solve these challenges around visibility and pricing most admit they’re concerned about how to overcome corporate inertia and institutional bias. The last thing you want to do is lead a large change initiative and end up alienating your agents your analysts and your underwriters.But what if you could discover pockets of pricing inadequacy and redundancy and free your underwriters to do what they do best? Sound too good to be true?No question you need to find ways to get started that makes the most sense for your organization. One way to achieve that is to make advanced data and analytics available first to your leadership team actuaries and analysts so you can translate information into meaningful actionable insight at your discretion.As an executive being able to really understand your portfolio and analyze your book at a very granular level allows you to compare policy profiles or policy segments to deeply understand how growth / profit trade-offs might impact your overall performance. What’s important is to utilize tools that provide leading indicators instead of relying on and waiting for historical results 2-3 years down the road. That way you’ll make better decisions earlier and stay ahead of your competition.By starting with an executive-led initiative you will learn the value of synthesizing vast amounts of data into a single value that gives you an indication about the relative risk of that policy. Then you can open up a whole new world of possibilities for your underwriters. They won’t have to worry about selecting the right risk characteristics and assigning the appropriate weighting. In fact you can have the confidence that even more of the right risk factors are being taken into consideration. Underwriters will be able to focus on the things they do best like evaluate management and safety programs or whatever those things are that you think are valuable. This is the artisan piece of underwriting. This is that critical human element that computers will never replace.Finding the right level of visibility and flexibility allows you to successfully adopt analytics on your terms. We’ve learned by partnering with carriers for nearly 10 years that each organization has its own path to incorporating analytics in a way that will deliver the results you expect. 
 Last week we listed the three big challenges insurance carriers face in driving underwriting profitability: Lack of Visibility Current Pricing Approach and Inertia. We discussed in some detail the need for better market visibility and this week we focus on pricing.Your underwriters face significant challenges when engaging with agents every day who want you to give them the right price for the right risk. It’s not easy to balance the competing demands from agents and your own internal company goals. In fact it’s nearly impossible. You’ve got a team of underwriters but they’re only human – and they’re being asked to make decisions based on limited industry data and a limited set of risk characteristics that may or may not be properly weighted. Imagine you’re the underwriter receiving submission after submission after submission and you can only realistically pay attention to a very specific set of risk characteristics.Maybe you’ll look at severity frequency historical loss ratio governing class premium size what state you’re in what agency it’s coming from and a number of other factors. As the underwriter you need to make decisions around “How much weight do I assign to each of these risk characteristics?”And a number of these will likely shift around quite a bit based upon the risk. Imagine how hard it is to fully understand how the importance of the class code relates to the importance of the historical loss ratio on every individual policy. For example “Is class code twice as important as average claims severity or only 25% more important?’ As you cascade around you’re only looking at something like seven different risk factors. And even with this limited set of variables it’s impossible to imagine how any human can fully understand the interplay across these variables and make a confident decision about how to price a risk and segment the better risks from the worse risks.Because of this complexity underwriters have an extremely difficult time predicting the most accurate loss ratio possible. The relative importance of these variables to each other in order to predict future loss ratio is a mathematical problem best done by computers which enables underwriters to focus on the more nuanced attributes of a policy such as a change in management or the effect a new safety program will have. Bottom line expecting your underwriters to take on today’s challenges using yesterday’s tools and yesterday’s approach to pricing is no longer sustainable. 
 Return on Equity (ROE) has gotten hammered and across the industry combined ratios are going in the wrong direction. You can’t impact interest rates but you can impact your loss ratios through profitable underwriting. But profitable underwriting is easier said than done. You’ve got a highly competent team of underwriters and you know they’re already working as hard as they possibly can.So for executives like you the big question becomes “How do I make my underwriting operation profitable without creating massive disruptions with my people and processes?”And there are three core challenges that are standing in the way:• Lack of Visibility• Current Pricing Approach• InertiaWe’re going to tackle each of these issues separately. Today we’ll focus on the lack of visibility. First the approach most companies take to data makes it hard to see what’s really going on in the market and within your own portfolio.As you look out at the entire market you see a number of carriers each with their own slice of the market. You’ve got a segment of the market and you know this piece well. But do you really know how well your portfolio is performing against the industry or how volume and profit tradeoffs are impacting your overall performance?Without the combination of the right data risk models and tools you can’t monitor your portfolio or the market at large and can’t see pockets of pricing inadequacy and redundancy. There are a growing number of options available to carriers to gain access to industry data. Valen’s InsureRight Platform is one valuable tool you can consider – one we’re obviously particularly keen on. But the bigger point is that the insurance industry is rapidly advancing its data and analytics capabilities. And we believe it’s a critical path to helping carriers create sustainable underwriting profitability. 
 Today we made a big announcement we think will help you utilize advanced data and analytical tools in the best way for your organization. We’ve learned a few things over the nine years we’ve partnered with carriers to implement predictive models within underwriting. There’s a strong and growing desire to take advantage of new sources of information and modern tools to help underwriters make risk selection and pricing decisions. At the same time each organization needs to define how to implement sophisticated analytics for themselves.That’s what inspired the Valen team to take the framework we’ve perfected over the last several years and make it accessible for your team. Our contributory database includes detailed policy and claims data that have been anonymized so that no one carrier’s data is recognizable to others. Now we’re opening up access to help you understand more about the market and implement analytics in a way that fits within your process.If you want to start with a management view that drives strategy and new guidelines you can do that. If you are ready to incorporate predictive scores within the underwriting workflow and leverage management visibility to understand model adoption and performance the InsureRight Platform is set up for that as well. Your underwriters will also benefit from this enhanced visibility. We’re providing valuable context so that underwriters understand what is driving an individual predictive score and it will no longer be a “black box” to them. This visibility and flexibility allows you to successfully adopt analytics on your terms.Because we see this as a breakthrough offering we’ve also created educational tools on how to improve underwriting performance that you can access online. This Week in Analytics includes our new blog insightful content and a digest of the most relevant insurance news on data analytics and predictive modeling. We hope you find this resource a quick way to stay up to date on the latest information to get started with advanced data and analytics. 
 Ever have a moment where you get goosebumps from an impact you’ve made in your career? For me it came a few weeks ago when AIG’s CEO Brian Duperreault began his remarks at a recent executive conference by describing an initiative I started over 4 years ago the #InsuranceCareersMovement. Brian continues to be our main champion complimenting the hard work of a global coalition putting a fresh authentic face on insurance as an attractive career option. He repeatedly points out the unprecedented cooperation this initiative enjoys from his over 40 years of experience in insurance. In a recent video he reflected “This particular movement has kind of blown me away in the sense that it has been embraced by so many in such a positive way. I haven’t seen the cooperation at this level before.” How often do you get the satisfaction of seeing someone of Brian’s stature recognize something you pioneered and see so many prominent CEOs join in? CEOs including Inga Beale from Lloyds Mike McGavick from XL Caitlin Mark Watson of Argo Group Pina Albo of Hamilton Group Dan Glaser of Marsh & McClennan and many others.While not always so publicly grand I’ve been incredibly blessed by a career filled with unique experiences having been part of companies that figured out how to create pivotal moments and propel their momentum forward to impact the way we run our businesses and live our daily lives. Why have I been so lucky? There are many reasons but we’ll focus in today on two themes.  #1: Take calculated risks and go beyond your depth. You don’t need a fully figured out plan to jump at a new opportunity. In each of my roles there have been numerous things I’ve learned on the job. I’ve had to persevere despite the butterflies in my stomach and doubts about whether I’d be able to figure it out. One thing I’ve always done is to seek out people who are experts in what I’m trying to accomplish and ask for advice. I’ve never been afraid to freely admit what I don’t know which has allowed me to learn quickly from others who have gone before me. I’m on the board of the Colorado Women’s Hall of Fame and recently had the privilege of interviewing the first woman in our state to be State Treasurer and Lieutenant Governor Gail Schoettler. Gail is being inducted into the Hall of Fame this March. She is so driven and inspiring and she shared with me that “Life always finds a way if you are open-minded… As you get older you have more people to ask for advice along with considering your own life experiences. My advice is always to get out there and experience as much as you can. Look beyond what you can learn at your job participate with non-profits community organizations and other venues to expand your world view.”#2: Create value in your industry beyond your own self-interest. The whole notion of elevating the game in insurance compelled me to find partners to build this talent initiative. My company Valen has nothing to sell related to talent recruitment or development. We provide advanced data analytics to help insurers make more informed decisions about risk assessment pricing customer acquisition and claims handling. Where this initiative aligns with our self-interest is in our need to reach CEOs with a vision about the importance of evolving their organizations to be more analytically-driven and the need to recruit tech-savvy talent to make that happen. With efforts like this there’s not a direct correlation to sales at first and you do take a leap of faith that the goodwill being created will pay dividends once momentum builds. I credit Valen’s CEO Dax Craig with giving me the leeway to see it through. It’s not an easy decision for companies because we all have limited resources and abilities to focus on the most important priorities every quarter.For today’s #MondayMotivation I encourage you to create a vision for your career that allows you to build a network focused on taking risks and furthering the collective good. It can absolutely create goosebump moments by enriching your own sense of purpose contribution and impact. #MakeItHappen #You’veGotThisABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 It seems all too recently that Friday night meant a trip to Blockbuster to tangle with other anxious movie watchers excited to grab the latest new release stock up on snacks and head home for a night of cinematic enjoyment. It was hard to imagine then that Netflix would emerge the leader one day and eventually cause Blockbuster to close their doors. What did Blockbuster miss?Brick and mortar retail stores continue to face an all-out assault and a new shopping paradigm led by Amazon. In a world where it’s more challenging to compete market share consolidation is very real and moves incredibly quickly. For property and casualty insurers there’s a significant divide between those who embrace data analytics to better compete and those who don’t. What sets them apart?The Top 10In analyzing the top 10 workers’ compensation carriers in 2016 the data provides a handful of indicators: For the companies who have been on this list since 2009 many of their percentages indicate a positive increase in net premiums written and often those companies like Berkshire Hathaway are seen as profitable. It’s a safe assumption that they are leveraging advanced data and analytics to play in the market. Texas Mutual made the list in 2014 when the same study was conducted but as of 2016 had been replaced. Companies like AmTrust and Old Republic in turn have since found their way into the top 10.What similar lesson can we learn from Blockbuster? After being the leader streaming services from the likes of Netflix changed the game. They came in and won with more sophisticated customer segmentation a new pricing model and a different experience that recognized the need to eliminate late fees. Blockbuster had largely been profitable by penalizing customers for late fees and when streaming services started to pose a threat Blockbuster leadership did not want to adopt the same initiatives in order to compete.Conversely the top work comp carriers of 2016 show a commitment to combining a data-driven strategy with underwriting expertise to produce measurable outcomes.  Analytically-driven companies understand risk quality at the policy level rather than making assumptions on particular classes geographies or other isolated factors. Being more granular allows insurers to compete and win the best risks and align price to risk which ultimately drives higher profitability.The companies who don’t adopt this more sophisticated approach will find themselves suffering from the volatility of market share consolidation rather than benefiting from it.What’s next? At the beginning of 2018 A.M. Best upgraded their outlook for commercial lines from negative to stable. According to the briefing much of this is credited towards the adoption and leveraging of predictive analytics by insurers “to better establish pricing at both the line of business/classification and individual risk levels.”  The briefing also notes the more widespread use of predictive analytics by carriers of all sizes not just larger carriers with significant data and IT resources.This points to an opportunity for insurers who are still on the fence to embrace change to better understand market conditions and cut into the competition. Without the fundamentals of a data-driven strategy those insurers could find themselves victim to market consolidation at the hands of a better-positioned carrier.   To learn more about this please read Valen’s 2018 Outlook Report.In such a competitive world it’s better to be a sought-after Netflix rather than a distant Blockbuster memory. 
 All year we’ve continually asked ourselves the same question: “On New Year’s Eve what will we be celebrating at the stroke of midnight?”2017 has been full of opportunity growth challenge and new trajectories and gives us much to be proud of. And so much of it is thanks to you.Here are a few of Valen’s 2017 greatest hits: The Insurity Acquisition The Insurity acquisition happened in January and represents the start of an exciting new chapter for Valen. This provides Valen with more depth and breadth to service both our/ Insurity clients as well as prospective ones.  As we look to 2018 product innovation is at the forefront for Insurity and there will be several key announcements in the coming months. Insurance Careers Movement Valen is an original founder and one of the biggest supporters of the Insurance Careers Movement. The movement is exploding! And gaining interest at a rapid speed with nearly 850 organizations currently involved. If you haven’t seen it yet it was even covered on the front page of the Wall Street Journal!The third annual Insurance Careers Month in February 2018 is being launched with another CEO Town Hall featuring Brian Duperreault Inga Beale Dan Glaser Pina Albo and many more. A.M. Best is hosting this global event on Feb. 1st at noon EST. Registration opens next week so please sign up on the website to receive the invite. Valen Summit The fourth annual Valen Summit held in beautiful Vail Colorado was a rousing success. The Summit helps executives lead their organizations in the cultural revolution happening within insurance as the industry moves toward becoming analytically-driven and making better-informed decisions by leveraging advanced data analytics.  We look forward to the end of February when we will be holding the fifth annual Summit in Winter Park Colorado. Valen Client SuccessOver the year we’ve seen lots of exciting client developments. The most important yardstick for us is delivering measurable outcomes for our clients. Each year we publicly release a  5-year ROI study. This year 16 work comp carriers were included representing over $1.76 billion in premium. While the overall work comp market has been improving Valen clients crush the industry average in both loss ratio improvement and premium growth. Our clients’ accident year loss ratio improved 1.9x compared to the industry while their direct written premium grew 2.9x (53% vs 19% growth for the industry overall.)We also continued to grow and serve more clients in work comp and commercial auto. We’ve entered new markets including medical stop loss claims data and we’ve begun offering our InsureRight platform to support clients who are deploying their own models. We helped launch Pie Insurance at InsureTech Connect which was an incredibly dynamic experience. Insurance Challenges In light of all these exciting events it’s important to look forward and we would be remiss to not mention some of the more difficult aspects of the year. 2017 brought a series of natural disasters that devastated communities and left people to rebuild their lives. This poses a challenge for insurers moving forward who provide an important service allowing businesses and consumers to thrive and take risks with a safety net when they need it.2017 was certainly busy but we look forward to 2018 and what the year will bring. We’ve already released our 2018 Outlook Report which discusses the divide that exists in the Industry.  What is the divide in our industry and why does it matter? Check out the report for yourself!Overall at midnight we will be clinking our glasses to you. Thank you for your support. Thank you for looking to Valen in 2017 to not only support your business initiatives but also as a thought leader. As a trusted partner and as a friend. We wish you and your families a happy healthy 2018!   
 Just a few weeks ago a Leonardo DaVinci painting sold at auction. Once thought lost it resurfaced in the early 2000’s and sold for the astronomical price of $450 million.  But equally as impressive were the years of significant restoration work that brought the painting from obscurity to life.Having only completed a handful of paintings in his impressive lifetime each DaVinci is a genuine masterpiece. The upkeep requires teams of skilled restoration artists historians and many others to keep the work true but also incorporate the science to help withstand the ages. Predictive models like any piece of art any car any human body need maintenance. Here are some important reasons why: Model RefreshModels are built on an initial set of variables. But over time they need an update to account for previously uncalibrated variables that become more relevant. Models can undergo a “refresh” to accommodate for this to help optimize performance and adoption as well as more targeted insight.Rates Changes Insurers often handle rate updates on their own. But do those rate changes get factored into models? If not insurers may not comprehend the impact on the models in essence flying blind.Training Underwriters may go through training when a model is initially introduced. But professional underwriting experience and working with a model over time provide greater insight and a gut check to how models work. This also helps boost adoption and usage. Continuing education for all parties involved is important.Executive Strategy Data is a powerful tool and it can be used to make strategic business decisions. Sometimes that insight can come from a third party with a bigger view. Valen’s  Manage application for example uses leading indicators to provide an entirely new set of metrics and deeper knowledge not previously available. It can be crucial in providing executive insight to shape growth expansion and overarching strategies.If you’ve spent the resources for the model you need to invest in keeping it at its full capacity to achieve business goals and measurable outcomes.With some maintenance DaVinci’s painting is seeing a new light of day. Is it time for you to do the same? Let us know if you are interested in a consultation for your current model. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 It’s the middle of the night. A family is sound asleep when suddenly their house is on fire. Thanks to the motion sensor technology of their video doorbell the family was alerted just in time and able to evacuate safely while help arrived. Why did this story make the technology founder weep on stage of InsureTech Connect?There’s no doubt that InsureTech is exploding and the second annual conference proved it. An Accenture statistic found that $6.3 billion had been invested by July 2017 and the energy of last month’s conference proved it. The landscape is full of bustling disruptors excited to take insurance into the future.Here are some of the biggest takeaways where insurers must take note.Why disruption is importantDuring his session Mike McGavick CEO of XL Catlin said insurance is becoming less relevant but with the caveat that now is the opportunity to turn it around. To that end lots of new companies are shaking things up. For example Insurance-as-a-Service is a new concept providing a digital and seamless customer experience in Europe. With looser regulatory environments there companies like Qover are pioneering this concept with the backing of established insurers like Lloyd’s of London.Innovation is everywhereFrom drones to doorbells technology is rapidly striving to answer insurer challenges. It’s important to work out the kinks and know failure is part of the process. Ring founder James Siminoff spoke of the various iterations it took to make his video doorbell come to life. After proving it helped stem home burglaries ultimately a partnership with American Family came to fruition.This partnership was a fundamental synergy in providing a customer with more value other than when they need help. “We want to leverage technology and partner with companies equally committed to preventing those events from happening… our customers can voluntarily enroll in this program and have their deductibles reimbursed if burglarized” American Family’s Director of Innovation James Rist said in the press release.Technology brings the need to be agile. Fail learn from mistakes and keep innovating. This is what InsureTech is bringing to the table that incumbents should use internally to drive innovation and maintain relevance.Customer CentricityCommercial lines have yet to experience the type of disruption that personal lines have. Seizing on this opportunity Pie Insurance a new entrant to the workers’ compensation market discovered that 65% of small businesses overpay relative to their empirical risk level by an average of 29% for workers’ compensation insurance.Pie launched at InsureTech Connect focused on making workers’ compensation insurance easier and more streamlined to get less complicated and with greater transparency. “The traditional high-touch approach agents and underwriters use in commercial lines leads to high prices and a protracted customer experience. Yet the profitability in this sector indicates that small accounts are subsidizing larger accounts at most insurance companies. By focusing exclusively on small businesses with a digitally enabled solution Pie will solve this problem at scale” said Pie CEO John Swigart.Why is this all important?This is insurance at its best. InsureTech is only going to produce more and more companies trying to solve insurer challenges but they will need help. Those who choose to embrace technologies may ultimately be providing the most benefit to their customers overall. Dax Craig CEO of Valen built the company on the same principle. “We started Valen on the two key tenets that our products must provide demonstrable return on investment for the customer and have a positive effect on the good of man. Read more on the Valen story.It links back to the purpose of insurance. Remember the story about the fire? Well when the founder of Ring was asked why he did what he did for a living it was because his technology had literally saved lives. 
 A high loss ratio is just one reason insurers entertain predictive analytics. How can the application of advanced data help curb such a problem? Here’s a brief recap.Loss ratio reduction can be achieved three ways: increase rate reduce losses and loss adjustment expenses or some combination of the two. Simply raising rates in a competitive market will cause a number of policyholders to find a better deal –and usually the better quality business is the first to go. Certainly identifying claims leakage or overpayment of losses helps address the cost side of a loss ratio problem.In a commoditized insurance market many insurers use similar rating characteristics. Traditional pricing models consider common easily obtained characteristics and broad classes of risk with average past performance metrics heavily influence rates.Predictive analytics can be used to sift through hundreds of characteristics to identify those that will separate the underpriced and overpriced risks. The resulting model can then be used to score each policy. This insight enables carriers to leapfrog over the competition by selecting only those risks that have the highest likelihood of profitability. Furthermore the use of additional characteristics for rating creates a competitive advantage.It’s important to turn to predictive analytics before implementing rate increases or cutting out entire classes of business. A broad stroke approach misses the nuanced insights leveraged by sophisticated competitors who use predictive analytics to unlock important variables and properly weight the influence of each one. Understanding these insights at a policy level helps underwriters better align price to risk contributing to a lower loss ratio.When aligned with a comprehensive strategy and underwriter expertise the effects can be measured. Valen recently compared the ROI of 16 work comp carriers writing a total of $1.6 billion in premium. Having used predictive analytics for at least two years the results speak for themselves. The results of Valen clients showed a 25-point reduction in loss ratio nearly two times better than the rest of the industry. To see an incredibly successful implementation of predictive analytics for a carrier and how the results not only reduced loss ratio by 66% but also won an award read our case study. 
 Incorporating predictive analytics requires change management especially for underwriters using it on a regular basis for risk selection. For those using predictive analytics in underwriting 68% of insurers have been using it for less than two years according to Valen’s own proprietary research.A common concern for insurers new to predictive analytics revolves around the data. If everyone is using the same data does that mean the results look the same and eliminate any competitive edge?In order to test this common perception Valen conducted a study. The purpose was to illustrate how best practices for analytics implementation are designed to achieve specific business goals for each individual insurer not drive toward a singular goal across insurers. In two separate tests was a predictive model resilient to direct competitors also using a model? In a head-to-head simulation of competitive models in production each insurer uses their own model to offer a competitive price. In a tie result the policy remained with the incumbent.In a related scenario the results identified a similar result. Advanced data and analytics allow insurers to know more about what they insure and make better decisions while enhancing the ability to differentiate from competitors.  What does all of this mean?This exercise proves that model uniqueness and innovation provide a crucial advantage. We continually emphasize the importance of an insurer’s goals and expertise combined with the innovative use and implementation of analytics. This together helps drive competitive differentiation. The winning combination is an organizationally supported data-driven strategy that uses predictive analytics as a tool…not a strategy. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 It’s no secret that data and predictive analytics can be powerful tools. But they’re most powerful when leadership strategy and training come together in alignment on their value and application.This is especially crucial when an insurer is looking to diversify in order to receive a better independent agency rating. In 2016 Valen’s proprietary research found that nearly 47% of insurers found predictive analytics to be helpful when being evaluated by rating agencies like Fitch and AM Best.For FHM they needed to expand product offerings by entering new geographic territories. For 53 years FMH was a single monoline carrier writing work comp in Florida. When they decided to expand outside the type of business and location they knew well they found they needed help in more ways than one.We often discuss the delicate balance of being a data-driven organization while managing underwriter intuition and expertise. In FHM’s case they needed the tools to put emphasis on consistent underwriting performance risk selection and pricing. But they had to do it in a way that underwriters retained ownership of their decisions while putting consistent processes in place.Without the right data accessible combined with the proper training and support achieving positive results can be a challenge. FHM turned to Valen for help. How did FHM overcome these challenges? And what was the outcome?To find out read the full case study here. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 Is there really a magic bullet that targets the best business to write?The woes for commercial auto insurers are many. Inadequate rates and reserves over the past few years are piling up along with a host of additional factors. Less experienced commercial drivers increased accidents distracted driving a rise in medical and litigation costs and rising vehicle repair costs (due to better technology) all contribute to a troubled line of business.The result is an unsustainable combined ratio now at a 15 year high of 110.4% and according to Fitch it’s having a negative impact on profits for the entire P/C industry. This ripple effect is compounded by the fact that it’s also the fast-growing commercial line with 5.6% growth in direct liability premiums for 2016.Better risk selection and pricing approaches are the best places to start. If you can assess the risk and price it correctly for the exposure from the beginning you deal with the problem at the root cause. Many insurers turn to advanced data analytics to better inform decision making. Predictive models create equal segments or “bins” of premium or policy counts to rank order policies from the best performing (bin 1) to the worst (bin 10). It allows insurers to take a scientific approach to reviewing policies that often look similar on the surface and arm their underwriters with actionable insights to better align price to risk.One of the biggest myths surrounding this application is the “magic bullet.” Many insurers ask which vehicle class to throw out to achieve better numbers for example. As you can see in the graph below this isn’t how it works. Risk inherently exists in every class of business; there isn’t one type of business that is always lower or always higher risk. It comes down to more sophisticated ways of assessing individual policies to get the price right and book the business that fits your strategy for growing and managing your portfolio.Many insurers still have the wrong approach to understanding risk. Instead of a broad stroke it’s better to incorporate tools at the policy level that pinpoint the problem. The real magic bullet is to provide your underwriters with advanced analytics a clear strategy and the support of senior management to remedy the current state of commercial auto underwriting. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 Workers’ compensation has enjoyed overall profitability for the past few years. When you consider how technology is reshaping the workplace and the impact of rising claims costs it’s clear change is on the horizon. What are the near-term implications for insurers? Two key areas of focus are growth and claims handling.Grow or dieWork comp is the leader in commercial lines in terms of market sophistication and the increasing use of analytics to compete on pricing. Unless your company is looking to be acquired the race is on for grabbing market share.  As illustrated in the chart above savvy market segmentation and pricing strategies are allowing the top players to secure market share. Companies who want a seat at the table must be willing to adopt the necessary tactics in order to achieve substantial growth.Additionally for multi-line property and casualty carriers expanded product offerings will be essential to reach new customers. For monoline work comp carriers writing additional class codes and expanding geographic territories will be an important way to expand business.Manage SeverityAlthough work comp claims overall are down severity is up. Since 1995 indemnity has increased 138% and lost-time claims severity has increased 214%. In comparison to previous years NCCI states the average medical lost-time claim severity grew 5% from 2015 to 2016 an additional 3.8% in 2016. And while the change was negligible for 2017 3.3% is already projected for 2018.When embraced early on predictive models can help stem severity. For example analytics can determine which claims could skyrocket ultimate close dates and final payments amounts. They can also pinpoint when to close a claim quickly and when it’s appropriate to involve a more skilled adjuster or nurse case manager.Get the team on boardTelling a simple and compelling story to your team about the challenges your business is facing and the strategies you are employing to address them goes a long way to getting buy in. For other tips on how to best implement analytics download the Organizational Readiness for Predictive Analytics checklist. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 Due to the rise of automation the role of the underwriter is changing. Even though technology is an enabler the expertise of an underwriter will always be an essential part of the equation.To validate this Valen conducted a study of a regional P/C insurer to identify the power of underwriting expertise. The study compared the usage of a model against the underwriters’ own predictions as well as a hybrid approach.In a three-part test comparison the results yielded the following:Underwriter (green line): This underwriting organization did in fact separate risks from best quality to worst quality. The best risks had a loss ratio about 20% better than average. The worst were 30% to 50% worse than average.Predictive Model (red line): This improved the overall differential between “best and worst” – the best risks are 50% better than average and the worst are about 75% worse than average.Hybrid Model (blue line): The average of the underwriter’s prediction and the model’s prediction which is represented by the blue line on the graph. It has by far the most lift which is 75% better than average all the way up to 120% worse than average.Time and time again the expertise of an underwriter supported by technology proves to be a winning combination.It is important to note resistance to predictive analytics in an organization is relevant. Out of 2000 participants a recent Celent study found nearly 47% of their organizations use of advanced data is infrequent at best to none at worst. Therefore the first hurdle is getting leadership to adopt a data-driven approach towards profitability. Then together with proper support implementation and analytics training the value of the underwriter can never be eclipsed. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes. 
 If you were to build a house it would take more than just supplies. It requires a sturdy blueprint a capable team and the right resources to bring it to life.The same process is true for insurers developing an advanced data and predictive analytics solution. It starts with a plan followed by quality data a capable team of both architects and data scientists and a handful of other factors to successfully build and incorporate the practice into the business.While this may seem like a massive undertaking it can be tackled in smaller manageable steps. Here we will address the necessary must do’s regarding data whether an insurer is building buying or creating a hybrid data solution.The must do’s of data collectionHave the right team in placeIn an ideal structure a data engineering team will collect cleanse and maintain an efficient database that can be leveraged by the data scientists. A data architect is best equipped to lead the data engineering team to design high-level reports for executives append external data sources update databases and work closely with the data scientists to help build predictive models.Work in an ecosystemAny data project should be part of a bigger ecosystem and the more integrated the better. The team must consider everything from the sources of data to the integration points and even training of the end users. When all the parts play together you have a cohesive solution that can deliver quality insights. The most common reason for failure is when the implementation hasn’t been thought through. Therefore when it’s time to implement the technical staff needs to collaborate with the business to make sure a plan is in place.Conduct a data inventoryIt’s important to take a technical inventory of the data you are using. This provides an initial benchmark of data and relationships and what you’re working with. Things like summary statistics or data sets with no variability or poor populations are useful to know up front. Not only is this helpful initially but also for on-going monitoring and performance evaluation of the solution.Data cleansingNow it’s time to evaluate if all of your data is relevant and meets expectations. This process will help you identify where the data needs to cleansed and what you could potentially remove from the model data set. You can use different types of visual diagrams to illustrate this process including heat maps trends aggregation models and more.Data GovernanceAs you go through the process of inventory and cleansing you will ultimately find things that cause you to reexamine the data. Data governance provides visibility to the changes that occur to data profiles. Keeping track of data versions revision history and security is crucial in understanding the evolution of the data and how it influences your modeling efforts. When data governance is lacking there are significant risks including a lack of ownership and transparency to name a few.These components make up the blueprint that becomes your overall approach to an analytics-based solution. Step by step we walk through how to begin building each of these pieces in our recorded webinar The Complete Guide for Implementing Predictive Analytics for Data Scientists and IT Professionals.Watch the replay 
 The speed the climb the drop and the turns…rollercoasters are an exhilarating thrill! But if the rollercoaster is commercial auto some insurers may be happy to get off the ride.It’s no secret the commercial auto industry is feeling pain. Much of it can be attributed to a soft market high claim payouts and inadequate ISO rates. A recent Carrier Management article re-emphasized this notion citing advanced technologies distracted driving and poorly trained drivers resulting in unfavorable claims results. Furthermore despite rate increases 2016 was the worst year for underwriting performance since 2001 with combined ratios growing 1.6% to 110.4% from the previous year.While the uncertainty of the situation may seem nauseating about 20% of commercial auto carriers are running a profit. What do they know that others don’t and what are they doing differently? More importantly will it remain at 20%? Or 18 months from now will we see the number of profitable insurers grow?Several indicators exist on how this will play out take personal auto for example. In the past six years profitable personal auto insurers can attribute their success to the adoption of data and analytics. To beat adverse selection they have effectively leveraged data to select price business and manage claims. This example has also played out effectively in work comp with the top carriers vying for market share over the last 5 years.Independent rating agencies like AM Best and Fitch agree. With negative outlooks projected for all commercial lines insurers that fail to adopt the advanced analytics and enhanced data to make competitive decisions will be unable to compete. It boils down to those that have incorporated analytics and those who have not.It’s up to insurers to decide when to face uncertainty head-on and make investments in the future. After all a ride on a Merry-Go-Round is much less stressful than on a rollercoaster.Learn how one commercial auto insurer fought adverse selection and improved their loss ratio by 29 points in our latest case study.  ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes.  
 Bob is a straight up superhero. It’s not such a big leap to think of Bob this way given claims adjusters help make people whole every day after some unfortunate incident. But how did Bob reach superhero status? His many years of experience are incredibly valuable to his customers. With his uncanny knack for knowing when to ask probing questions and when to lend a sympathetic ear his customers often remark how Bob was ‘really there’ for them in their time of need.Still Bob wasn’t one to rest on his laurels. He developed an immense superpower that allowed him to see into the future and prevent accidents before they ever happened. World peace was a world with no accidents no turmoil!A bit farfetched? Truth be told that was just a cool dream Bob had one night. What he actually found was something much more useful. In the real world of complex work comp claims Bob realized the value in leveraging the latest tools to understand early on the trajectory of claims and their potential to skyrocket.Claims adjusters are busy and focused on properly handling claims in a swift and efficient manner. And they have the added pressure of knowing that the outcome of their work directly affects an insurer’s bottom line. Leveraging predictive models can help their process and pinpoint crucial information necessary to effectively triage a claim. Things like knowing more definitively the likelihood of a claim spiraling out of control (jumpers) the need for a nurse case manager ultimate payment predictors and so on.A LexisNexis study pointed to the value of advanced analytics. When implemented early on insurers experienced the following impact to ROI:15-25% lower severity payments25-29% lower attorney involvement5-15% shorter cycle timesAdvanced data analytic approaches to managing claims is growing especially to account for a wave of experienced adjusters retiring from the industry. Valen is creating a conversation around claims and the arsenal that creates claims superheroes like Bob in your organization. We’d be happy to hear from you. Request a conversation.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes.  
 Why now?Why is now the time for a more sophisticated approach to pricing and risk selection? Well a growing number of insurers are improving their performance and grabbing market share at rates that leave the competition in the dust.How long until it impacts you?In our 2017 Outlook Report we highlighted the need to shift the traditional insurance mindset. Today the focus has become the policyholder as the primary customer (not the agent/broker) and the need to adopt the same methods tech giants use to win customer loyalty. The third principle is understanding the best mechanism to leverage the fundamental building blocks of data and analytics.What Valen’s ROI study really highlights is what occurs when insurers become experts at how to incorporate analytics into their overall business strategy and decision-making. The exercise quantified 16 workers’ compensation insurers writing $1.76 billion in premium over a five- year period.For the second consecutive year of running the study the numbers speak loud and clear:53% higher premiums (2.9X industry average)25% improvement in loss ratios (1.9x industry average)What do they all have in common?  They’ve partnered with Valen to help execute a data- first approach to analytics as part of an overall business strategy with clearly defined goals. When a model is properly calibrated to achieve measurable outcomes and is accompanied by a thoughtful approach to integration and implementation it empowers underwriter performance. Being a data-driven company is a best-practice for better risk selection pricing and profitability. And it’s a winning formula that helps customers win too.For deeper analysis check out the infographic and read our case studies. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business-to-business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes.  
 In the famous story David (the underdog) defeated Goliath with a single slingshot. If the same story was set in modern day insurance David would be strategic and tech savvy and his slingshot would be data analytics.According to a recent Fitch report mutual and smaller insurers (David) risk being left out of the big data revolution especially if they don’t keep pace with tech investments made by larger multinational (Goliath) competitors.The industry can no longer ignore modern technology. Conversely it is a daunting task to manage and leverage the abundance of data available. To survive companies must develop tools to analyze and integrate data into business decisions.Larger companies have the resources to build in-house analytics teams. They can competitively price and win the most favorable risks marginalize their competitors and force adverse selection upon them. But what if the Davids can’t outspend the Goliaths of the industry? Building and deploying predictive analytics internally is costly and time-consuming. Smaller companies can be nimbler in their approach and can bring on strategic partners and third parties that also understand these challenges and effectively help them direct the trajectory of their slingshot.Whether you are building data analytic tools internally using a third party or a combination of both there are important considerations and best practices that will deliver the business value you expect.Check out our Organizational Readiness Checklist for a list of key steps to take when developing a strategy to join the big data revolution. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business to business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes.  
 It may seem like the changing of the guard is occurring as InsurTech start-ups continue to grow in size and number.Changes in cumbersome traditional models of distribution can be seen everywhere as direct-to-consumer and usage-based models have become the expectation for customers in a digital age. Companies like Trov and Metromile have answered the call making on-demand usage-based insurance easy to buy and customized to the consumer needs. Recently startups Insurify and Next Insurance went a step further offering the ability to purchase coverage via Facebook Messenger chatbots that are able to mimic the one-to-one conversation that would normally take place with an agent. Chatbots also provide the added benefit of being powered by analytics that make fast accurate pricing decisions. A more extreme departure from the traditional model is hard to fathom!But where these companies will face a real challenge is not in the distribution but in the back-end administration of the policies that they sell with such ease.  In many cases the policies are underwritten by traditional carriers which begs the question “What has really changed?”Yes it’s easier and faster to buy a policy that’s customized to your needs but the biggest pain point for consumers has always been the process of filing and settling a claim. With traditional insurers handling the nuts and bolts of the claims administration insurtech companies are falling short of transforming the entire customer experience. Lemonade has taken a different approach becoming a fully-licensed insurance company in their own right and they’ve demonstrated the ability to process and pay a claim in about 3 seconds. This kind of expedited processing however will be difficult if not impossible for those startups that don’t impact the entirety of a policyholder’s experience.This is where reinsurers have the advantage. This group of companies that has typically been a behind-the-scenes player in the game can now be the star as they are not shackled with existing processes and systems that make it hard to change course to a customer-focused distribution model. This is not to say that traditional insurers are being left out in the cold. There is still ample opportunity to tune-in to customer needs and simplify a buying cycle that’s inefficient complex and in stark contrast to industries that allows consumers to do almost anything through a smartphone app. The challenge will be to consider the entire customer experience to transform the end-to-end process.Many traditional insurers have taken on the role of VC-backer in what one can only assume is a plan to first build then buy their way into innovation via acquisition of smaller startup companies. How this will play out remains to be seen. But one thing is sure the power of data analytics will be key to the success of all insurers old and new as the customer and market demand faster and more agile transactions. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr CMO of Valen Analytics has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in traditional marketplaces. As the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics she helps pave the way for Valen’s clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. Before Valen she ran business to business marketing for internet technology pioneer and market leader ServiceMagic.com (now HomeAdvisor).Kirstin has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. Most recently Kirstin is leading the Insurance Careers Movement coalition a grassroots initiative of more than 850 insurance organizations raising awareness of what insurance has to offer young professionals. She has been involved in several non-profits focused on Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education among other non-profit causes.  
 Distracted driving is nothing new. Whether it’s putting on make-up eating dealing with small children talking on the phone or sending a text message drivers are often distracted from their primary focus of driving a vehicle. Hartford CEO Christopher Swift has stressed the issue and implored the public to educate friends and family about this issue that is “causing real pain for society in general.” Often it occurs while people are driving to and from work but it also happens when driving on the job adding to the list of factors that is wreaking havoc in the world of commercial auto insurance.Roads in the US are seeing more automobile traffic now than ever. According to the Federal Highway Administration the US saw a record 3.17 trillion miles traveled by vehicles in 2016 and much of this traffic comes from commercial vehicles making deliveries service calls and transporting cargo. Unfortunately these on-the-job drivers are not immune to the common distractions that make drivers more likely to have an accident. In fact one study suggests that people who drive for work might be more prone to distracted driving as they’re on the phone or in a hurry to reach their destination. While many employers are implementing policies to reduce these distractions and make their drivers safer it’s not been enough to slow this trend.If you’re a commercial auto insurer you’ve probably already seen the results of this bad habit in the form of more frequent and severe claims. In a recent report  A.M. Best cited distracted driving as one of the causes for increased severity of commercial auto liability claims that contributed to an underwriting loss in the P&C industry in 2016.  In this soft market it’s hard to adjust your pricing to make sure you’re getting the right rate for the risk without losing share.  What’s more it can be extremely difficult for an insurer to know which of the risks they write is a good risk and which is a bad risk. Looking at your own data will show a part of the picture but if you’re falling victim to adverse selection or have limited data you may be finding more questions than answers.  Is it possible that some of those policies you’re concerned about losing due to a rate increase are bad risks that you should be aiming to avoid? This and other questions are paving a rough road ahead for this line of business.There may not be a magic bullet that can solve all of these issues but that doesn’t mean there’s nothing to be done. A good place to start is with an understanding of adverse selection and how it might be impacting your business. Next it is helpful to recognize that there are as Valen CEO Dax Craig put it in a recent article “winners and losers in every vehicle class.” The key is to differentiate between the two and make yours an organization focused on smart data-driven risk selections on this bumpy ride. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 “Boring.” That’s the word that comes to mind for many young professionals when they think of a career in insurance and this misconception is costing the industry. With an estimated 400000 insurance professionals expected to retire over the next couple of years the insurance industry is battling to attract talent. The challenge doesn’t end there however. It’s not just a question of back-filling positions vacated by retirees it’s also about building a workforce that’s diverse demographically-speaking as well as in skills and experience. The need to fill positions is also exacerbated by timing—this problem is hitting at the same moment that carriers are retooling their operations to become more profitable which will require data and analytics talent within IT actuarial and underwriting departments.Young professionals are looking for collaborative socially conscious organizations – expectations that are very different than their parents and grandparents had when entering the workforce decades ago. In addition millennials tend to have different work priorities and styles having been raised in a tech-savvy customer-centric world.  It’s no wonder that the reputation the industry has as one that’s boring and bureaucratic can be very disparaging to new grads and young professionals.So what is the real cost of this talent crisis? Aside from the additional resources needed for recruitment and the strain put on existing employees as positions remained unfilled not having a diverse workforce can hurt your company’s bottom line. According to a study by the American Sociological review companies with the highest levels of racial diversity brought in nearly 15 times more sales revenue on average than those with the lowest levels of racial diversity. Furthermore companies with more female board members achieved 66% higher performance on invested capital than those with fewer women. The stiff competition for top IT talent can delay infrastructure upgrades and new software implementations because there simply aren’t enough people to get the work done quickly.The good news is that this is a talent pool that’s ripe for the fishing if the industry can adapt. 51% of recent grads feel that they are underemployed and female millennials are entering the global workforce in larger numbers than ever. In the past insurance companies built their businesses on profits from investments but as those margins continue to dwindle and the focus shifts to underwriting profits an emphasis on analytics talent becomes more important. To hire and retain this talent companies must put an emphasis on diversity understand what young professionals want and showcase the strengths of this industry: It’s stable rewarding and limitless. It’s the career trifecta.February is Insurance Careers Month (ICM) and the ICM grassroots collaboration is dedicated to spreading the word about the #CareerTrifecta. In this month insurance professionals are being called upon to bring attention to this talent gap and all that the insurance industry has to offer – on social media at networking events and through platforms like InVEST and MyPath. To learn more please visit insurancecareertrifecta.org for information and resources about how each of us can help close the talent gap. 
 Welcome 2017! With 2016 in the record books it’s a good time to look back on what we learned during the past year of growth adaptation and change.If there’s one lesson that 2016 sent loud and clear it’s that innovation is changing the game at every turn. At the start of the year we anticipated that 2016 would be a year in which the industry would either embrace or fight change. The number of InsurTech start-ups is steadily growing and some are making grand plans to affect change. Although it only began selling insurance in the summer of 2016 by late December Lemonade announced its plans to expand nationwide throughout 2017 and the company recently announced it set a world record for speed by processing and paying a claim in a mere 3 seconds.Where InsurTech aims to disrupt the current distribution model and improve the customer experience other innovations that are not specific to the insurance industry are creating a new set of challenges. In Oct 2016 former Google employees at Otto paired up with Anheuser-Busch to complete the world’s first commercial shipment using a “driverless” truck. Self-driving cars have been long anticipated and tested for personal use but this commercial application was the first of its kind. Adding further complication and blurring the line between commercial auto and cyber risk coverage is the Amazon Snowmobile – an 18-wheeler that can transport up to 100 petrabytes of data from a company’s data warehouse to its cloud servers. Now an industry that’s been slow to change is thrown into warp speed as what used to be science fiction has become reality and new coverage complexities emerge. What remains to be seen is how insurance will be required to adapt develop the necessary skills to innovate and keep pace.The second lesson is to keep a close eye on how traditional insurance players respond to this wave of innovation. Reinsurers are particularly interesting to watch as low investment yields and an increasing mix of capital interests in the reinsurance space spawn new ways to invest and leverage their own capital. In fact CB Insights has reported a 20x rise in reinsurance investments in InsurTech from 2013-2016. One big advantage reinsurers have compared to traditional carriers is that they are capable of serving the entire supply chain (from quoting to binding to claims handling) and aren’t restricted by legacy systems and distribution models that primary insurers are required to navigate.And last but certainly not least we saw in 2016 the industry recognize that the customer is king. Policyholder customers have long been dissatisfied with interactions with their insurance companies seeing it as a “necessary evil” rather than a positive experience. In the past year companies have spent their time and energy not just on developing new tools for tech-hungry Millennials but also in empowering their human workforce. As much as we love an app it can’t replace the trusted advice of an agent.This is certainly not a comprehensive list of lessons from 2016 but these are three important dynamics to watch as we enter the new year. Adaptability and flexibility are now requirements in the business of mitigating risk. This is a shift not just in the way of doing business but also in the way we think about the customer and technology-driven solutions. For a more in-depth look at how these lessons could impact the coming year register for our Jan. 31st webinar 2017 Outlook Report: An Industry Mindset and get your own copy of the full report here. 
 If you’re like many professionals in the P&C industry you’ve no doubt read about all the promised disruption of InsurTech and the billions being invested by VC firms. For some this new breed of competition looks like cause for uncertainty. How will the roles of underwriters and actuaries change? What about agents and producers? Will these new business models overcome the barriers to entry and undercut the industry the way Uber and Airbnb have?The good news is that nimble tech-savvy companies are riding this wave rather than letting it take them under. This industry that has traditionally taken a stand-offish approach to new technology is demonstrating a shift in attitude and a willingness to with new tech not against it. A recent study published to the research firm International Data Corp (IDC) reports that worldwide spending on IT will climb from around $936 billion this year to $1.1 trillion by 2020. Cloud-related services business process outsourcing and systems integration make up the bulk of this increased spending but predictive analytics and R&D spending is also on the rise. In fact analyst firm Celent reported that in 2015 data analytics initiatives outspent core systems replacement for the first time in over a decade for P&C insurers.In addition to making greater investments into their own technical infrastructure many companies are creating joint ventures with InsurTech start-ups and creating divisions within their own organization that focus on innovation. Liberty Mutual and USAA for example are backers of Snapsheet a new entrant that’s developing virtual auto claims technology and services. These companies recognize that while established insurers have the upper hand where financial resources reputation and big data are concerned the modern insurance consumer is demanding change in the form of easier more transparent interactions with their insurance company.This is not to say that all InsurTech startups will have the longevity to make a lasting impact on this well-established industry. Like many tech disruptors of the past some are rich in drive and outside-the-box thinking but poor in the industry-specific expertise that’s needed to stand the test of time. Having a great idea is not enough. The value and sustainability of this idea will have to be tested and retested over the course of months and years to come. Supporting this test-and-learn approach requires a seismic shift in the culture of many insurers. Insurers will benefit from keeping a watchful eye on these disruptors and looking for ways in which new ideas can be applied to old business to reduce costs increase profitability and improve the customer experience. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 If you’re the head of underwriting you don’t need anyone to tell you that the skies are stormy for your industry. Times have changed since you began working at an insurance firm. Ten years ago developing strong pricing looked different than it does today. You could rely on general pricing trends and market cycles. But now that’s changed. Since 2008 massive changes have swept across the insurance industry. Pricing decisions now require more targeted and segmented data. Your job now demands that you get your pricing down to a science for one simple reason—the onus is now on you to generate revenue and profits in an increasingly sophisticated market. In addition to these challenges you are facing new competitors in the insurance industry. Your traditional competitors are exploiting their technological prowess to enter your market with a definite edge. We know of one company that joined the technological momentum and lowered their loss ratio by 17%. With laser-focused data and analytics companies like this are achieving sophisticated risk selection and are leaving the riskier policies for your firm. Retiring before you have to implement sweeping technological changes is no longer feasible. And as you watch numerous policies go upside down you’re wondering how much more pain—and pressure—you can take. The good news is that there is an answer for your problems. The key to survival in today’s new environment is strong pricing. You can evaluate how strong your pricing is. Click here to take the AssessmentPricing Assessment: http://training.valen.com/assessment/Strong Pricing: Your Opportunity to Make More MoneyStrong pricing represents the only opportunity you have to increase your underwriting profit and lower your loss ratio. It’s the only thing that will keep you from suffering from adverse selection. Everything else involved in your role is an expense. Once a potential policyholder has signed that contract you are obligated to fulfill your promise and accept his or her liability. You’re locked into an agreement that was made on limited knowledge. There’s a severe data gap between what your policyholders know about their risk and what you know. To top it off it’s an agreement you can’t drastically change with new information. You must have all the information you need upfront to create strong pricing. Other industries have the ability to adapt their actions to changing forces. If an IT company releases a flawed version of software the answer is simple. The company creates an updated version based on the new information it’s received. In the insurance industry the best opportunity to get it right is the first time. As a result you must rely on as much data as you can obtain. And even though your underwriters’ discretionary pricing has been informed by actuaries these aggregated rates still allow you to lose more. Your underwriters have to make individual judgments on each policy that comes their way. And where specific data doesn’t inform decisions you’ll often find your underwriters rely on a big-bucket approach.  The fact is that your revenue (or the lack thereof) is generated on a much more granular level. You’re making and losing money policy by policy. If you think that you are losing money because of an “irrational market” or the changing legal/statutory environment you are misdiagnosing your problem of adverse risk selection.To solve this problem and find accurate pricing you’re going to need much more specific data than your actuaries can provide. You need a narrower focus. In short your job demands that you help your underwriters find strong pricing for each policy through predictive analytics built on solid data. Strong Pricing: 3 Reasons Insurers Lack It Not every insurance company relies on predictive analytics fueled by strong inputs. In fact many insurance companies have a flawed approach to strong pricing. To see if your firm has a faulty approach to predictive analytics evaluate the strength of your pricing tactics. Click to take Free Assessment.Here are 3 scenarios that might describe the situation at your firm.  You’re solely relying on the instincts of your underwriters.Your underwriters do have a massive amount of experience and expertise. But if you do not support them with predictive analytics they will rely on something else much less accurate: their biases. Biases contain your underwriters’ experiences and can help them steer clear of risky policies. However biases can lead to neglecting policies that are profitable. If a team member once underwrote a construction firm only to absorb significant liability because of the general contractor’s negligence he or she will likely avoid other similar businesses. Not all construction companies are equal and there are a number of variables that determine a policy’s profitability. If your underwriter doesn’t have access to specific easy-to-use data you stand to lose a significant amount of money by selecting a risky policy or rejecting a profitable one. In the end your underwriter needs the support of predictive analytics. In fact we’ve done a study that reveals the best pricing occurs when you combine predictive models with underwriter expertise.  Your underwriters don’t have a user-friendly predictive modeling tool. Sadly many predictive modeling tools simply aren’t designed for your underwriter. If you’ve integrated predictive modeling into your firm you may think you’re ahead of the curve. The real question is this: Can your underwriters use the tools you give them?Unless you provide a user-friendly interface you’ll never tap into your valuable statistics. To see if your firm falls into this category here are some questions to ask: Are predictive analytics delivered in a usable format? If your underwriter has to deconstruct an Excel spreadsheet to understand how to price a policy your underwriter will have a difficult time implementing the new model of decision-making. Does predictive analytics provide real-time decision support? If your underwriters can’t access the data they need when they need it then you may miss valuable opportunities.  You lack strong data. This third reason might be the most subtle of the reasons you lack strong pricing.  Even if you have a predictive and usable model for your underwriter that doesn’t guarantee accurately adjusted premiums. The inputs for your predictive model may be based on faulty data. For one your data may lack the breadth needed to draw accurate conclusions. But there’s also another danger. Insurers suffer from self-selection bias. Your firm probably has a tendency to insure a certain type of policy holder more frequently than another. And when you gather data from this pool you deal strong pricing a staggering blow. Your underwriters base their decisions on data from your company—not the data that describes the characteristics of policyholders across the nation. Unless a policy comes from the same category as the policies you’ve sampled you have a shaky foundation for an accurate premium. Strong Pricing: Your SolutionIf you suspect your firm has a shaky or ineffective pricing strategy you can take steps now to remove the obstacle that stands between you and strong pricing. Evaluate your pricing practices with the How Strong Is Your Pricing? Assessment. You’ll gain valuable information that reveals how your practices and strategies are either strengthening or weakening your underwriting. After you complete the assessment you’ll be given a score report. Your score will help you see where your organization falls on the strong pricing spectrum. Don’t rely on ineffective generalizations to explain your increasing loss ratio. Assess your firm’s pricing and get specific with your organization’s needs. Click here to take Free Assessment.http://training.valen.com/assessment/ 
 Get at the root cause of premium fraud and misclassified payrollDid you know that nearly half of all workers’ compensation policies have some level of misclassified exposure? As you would expect some industries are worse than others. Looking at the years 2008 – 2012 construction had the largest percentage of misclassified payroll totaling a whopping $76.8 billion. And it might surprise you to learn that just 15 class codes represent 75% of the total problem in construction.You may be asking yourself what it means if 1 out of every 2 policies you write has inaccurate payroll numbers.First not every policy reaches a threshold where the level of misclassification is critical enough to examine. That begs the question of which policies you really need to pay attention to. A shot gun approach isn’t going to be very effective in answering this question. Generally speaking we have found that smaller policies have a higher rate of misclassification.Second it is impractical and incredibly unprofitable to physically audit every policy. That’s especially true of smaller policies. The crux of the issue is that carriers are constantly dealing with information asymmetry. The insured knows exactly what their payroll is and what their employees are doing. The agent knows more about the insured than you do. The bad news is that carriers often have less information on hand about a particular insured at the point of new business.The good news is that there are strategies to address the information gap that even the playing field from a data standpoint. Better yet you can gain a competitive advantage by identifying misclassified payroll proactively. One benefit is being more exact in the types of policies to audit by going beyond traditional business rules (e.g. industry size of policy etc.) that trigger an audit. These blunt force tools are no longer as effective as they used to be.Third in light of the work comp fraud case in New York carriers can anticipate an increasing amount of pressure from public officials to closely monitor employers’ practices. Having the right tools in place has never been more critical to stay organized and ultimately improve your bottom line.One big part of solving the misclassification issue is having better information on class code exposure by policy. There is a straightforward set of actions you can take that are proven to help carriers get a better handle on this issue and begin to solve it. We’ve condensed these insights into an easy to follow guide The Punch List: 4 Steps to fix payroll misclassification on your book.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 It all started with her brother’s science kit. While he wouldn’t let Monica touch it as a little girl she got hooked just watching him build his experiments. Now she’s headed off to the University of Colorado –  Boulder to pursue a degree in Aerospace Engineering.“I want to be part of that group of people that actually figures out how to take human beings out of our own galaxy.” Monica Chairez Valen Analytics 2016 Scholarship WinnerWatch Monica accept her $4500 scholarship.At Valen we’re always looking for the brightest minds who want to solve really tough problems for our customers by using math and science skills. This year we reached out to Colorado Early College an urban magnet high school in Denver established in 1976 that incorporates real-life learning experiences in dozens of career-oriented courses. We were thrilled to find a very deserving student in Monica Chairez who told us that Valen’s scholarship will allow her to be debt-free when she graduates.Monica has demonstrated a fierce commitment to her education being a leader amongst her peers and giving back to her community. Take a look at her impressive student resume:Actively involved in CEC’s Robotics program serving as captain for the FTC (First Tech) and RTC teams.Dedicated countless hours of community service – well above anything that was required of her – to help both the Girl Scouts and Boys & Girls Club.Model student and National Honors Society member.Classmates describe Monica as someone who always has a smile on her face and motivates her peers to be their best by setting the example herself.Completed over a semester’s worth of college transferrable credits through concurrent enrollment at the Community College of Denver.It’s no wonder the leadership at CEC chose Monica to be considered for our scholarship. We are humbled to play a small part in her future and watch her soar in this galaxy and beyond. Are you recruiting the best and brightest to join insurance?Valen leads an industry coalition making insurance attractive to Millennials. Join the Insurance Careers Movement – a grassroots volunteer initiative with over 600 participating companies. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 Back in the 90s dot-com era almost every company that tried to invest in insurance technology failed leaving very few able and willing. Today however there is more insurance tech investment than ever before but not in a traditional sense that one might expect. Rather it’s flowing in through companies that are trying to disrupt the industry.There’s a lot of talk saying Lemonade Coverhound Policy Genius Everquote Compare.com and Zenefits won’t succeed but the playing field is different now for two reasons:The Internet is everywhereInsurance is not meeting customer expectationsConsider Net Promoter Score which answers the question “Would you recommend X to a friend/colleague on a scale of 1-10?” With an average industry-wide NPS of 28 (out of 100) the fact is we are not living up to customer expectations in insurance.The rise of the Internet has now made it easier for dissatisfied consumers to engage with businesses. No matter the regulatory environment capital or other challenges someone will always find a way to satisfy them when they’re not happy and innovators figure out ways to use technology to go after the incumbent market share with a new way to do business.One carrier that is doing this unusually well for the industry is USAA with a 2015 Net Promoter Score of 75 a giant leap of 47 points more than the industry average. So what are they doing differently? A lot as it turns out.Whereas insurance has traditionally played it safe in their approach to business (and not surprisingly…it’s the business of insurance to create safety nets) USAA’s mission is to do whatever it takes to benefit the customer. This customer-centric attitude makes innovation a top priority where ideas are vetted with an attitude of “fail fast fail cheaply.” The carrier is not afraid to invest in new technologies consider new approaches and test out new partnerships including the one with Google Compare prior to Google’s announcement that it would be halting operations.Jon-Michael Kowall AVP of P&C Innovation said that USAA was undeterred by Google Compare shutting its doors. In fact the vast majority of ideas in their innovation incubator fail…but a few hit it big and those are the gold nuggets they so successfully mine for. Its innovation center ICE (Innovation Community for the Enterprise) boasts a tree sculpture with leaves that represent the company’s patents which has over 1100 for ideas by USAA employees.USAA isn’t the only company insurance carriers should keep their eyes on. As mentioned in Innovator’s Dilemma: A Constant in Every Industry…Even Insurance rules for established industries are changing. Non-insurance start-ups like Lemonade Coverhound and Policy Genius are shaking up the industry and they’re just getting started. With $2.65B in insurance tech investments last year and a 36% increase in these investments predicted for 2016 according to KPMG we’ve only seen the tip of the iceberg ahead as more and more companies like Embroker continue to burst onto the scene.What this means for insurance is simple: The game is changing and it’s changing fast. Incumbents who prioritize legacy systems over innovation and customer needs are going to lose market share to those both within industry and from outside that are more data-driven and customer-centric. “This is the way things have always been done” is no longer a sustainable reason to keep doing them that way.The good news for those carriers that are just coming to this realization is that it’s not too late to foster a new culture of innovation within its organization. Knowing where to start can often be a daunting task however and a good first step is to know what’s on the horizon. This interactive 2016 Outlook Report is a great place to get a look at what P/C carriers need to know whether they’re just getting started or are already well on the way.Get the 2016 Outlook Report nowABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 It’s easy to get swept up in the overwhelming evidence and scientific proof that data-driven decisions produce superior results. While true it’s also important to remember that while technology is an enabler it is humans that generate actual results. Valen recently launched a new website where we provide easy access to our proprietary research findings that prove that despite how important data is to making decisions a predictive analytics platform performs best when combined with underwriter expertise.In addition we’ve also compiled the following toolkit:Pricing: Underwriters used to have limited information on which to base decisions. The rules of the game are changing however with ever-increasing amounts of data and an increasing demand for faster quotes. Studies show that the quote-to-bind ratio drops 40+% if your underwriter can’t respond within 24 hours so how can they compete and still get the price right if they aren’t armed with the latest technologies?Risk Selection: If you could improve performance by simply cutting out entire segments of the market everyone would do it. However the reality is that there are good and bad policies in every segment of the market and your underwriters need the tools to help make that determination.Premium Fraud: Payroll misclassification happens for many reasons from outright fraud to inadvertent error. Whatever the reason may be it costs the insurance industry billions of dollars.Results: Investments require a solid return and Valen’s customers are beating the market. We’ve built a robust technology platform and set of services that keep the burden light on teams and make the implementation process seamless.Industry News: There is a lot of insurance industry news out there so we do the legwork for you. We cherry pick the news that is the most impactful to your business today from news of disruption to technology to rates and more.Resources: We practice what we preach and truly believe that predictive analytics perform best when combined with human expertise. That’s why we work with some of the best leaders in our industry and why we share our findings with you.Whether you are just beginning your analytics journey or you are well-versed and simply looking to hone your understanding check out our new site and subscribe to our blog to stay up-to-date on industry thought leadership and news.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 Disruption is happening everywhere and the rules for established industries are changing. John Deere now a software company is currently in a tiff with farmers about retaining ownership of tractors because it operates the software. Retail giant Penney’s saw stocks tumble despite strong Q3 ’15 sales because of sluggish Macy’s and Nordstrom numbers as investors fear the lure of going to a physical store is waning. Companies like Airbnb and Uber have moved other industries who have long relied on regulatory protection captive markets and capital assets to the backseat of the sharing economy.How does this disruption happen to incumbents who have been in the game for a lifetime or more? It all comes back to one thing.Consumers. Always. Win.No matter the regulatory environment capital or other challenges innovators will find a way to use technology to satisfy them. It always begins the same way as well: A catalyst which prompts a new way of thinking and finally a breakthrough.Take the Uber origin story for example. The founders of Uber had trouble hailing a cab in the rain one night (Catalyst) so they thought there must be a better way to find cars in the right place at the right time. Their idea wasn’t originally to try to take over taxi services. Rather they were originally thinking of a limo-time share service (New Thinking) which was quickly modified to an app for black car ridesharing service (Breakthrough) that the company is known for todayThis is certainly true in the insurance industry as well as non-insurance companies like Lemonade Coverhound Policy Genius Everquote Compare.com and Zenefits who are making breakthroughs every day. And they’re not the only ones. There are currently $2.65B in insurance tech investments up from virtually nothing twenty years ago.As the Innovator’s Dilemma suggests innovation is key no matter what industry you work in. Once a company is in a mature industry for some time it often feels a false sense of security. In this state it is easy to dismiss small innovations as unnecessary as the company continues to serve the majority of its customers (in insurance these are either independent agents or policyholders). Meanwhile an outside competitor flies in under the radar to satisfy a niche market in a completely new way. All of the sudden the traditional company is blindsided loses significant market share and may go out of business completely.In this age of digital these disruptors happen more quickly and more often – some not even requiring expertise in the fields they enter (i.e. Uber Airbnb). For insurance this is a very real threat as most insurance companies are slow to innovate and adopt new technologies. So what’s on the horizon for the insurance industry? The 2016 Outlook Report reveals what’s next and how can they leverage innovation within their own organizations to protect themselves against the impeding threat of outside disruption.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 In 2011 the New York grand jury released a report showing that New York City’s construction industry cost the city and state approximately $500 million as a result of unpaid workers’ compensation premiums in which businesses paid salaries off the books or purposely misclassified employees as independent contractors. This is just the tip of the iceberg. From 2008-2012 construction had misclassified their payroll totaling at $76.8 billion with 15 class codes representing 75% of the total problem.Construction is the biggest culprit in premium fraud and misclassified payroll but nearly half of all workers’ compensation policies have some level of misclassified exposure. So what does it mean if one out of every two policies written have inaccurate payroll numbers?Keep in mind that not every policy reaches a threshold where the level of misclassification is critical enough to examine. Interestingly we have found that large company insureds (e.g. large construction firms) tend to have less exposure to misclassification because they understand they will be physically audited more frequently. Smaller policies generally have a higher rate of misclassification.That being said it is impractical and incredibly unprofitable to physically audit every policy especially smaller policies. Instead many carriers tend to focus their audit policies on policies above certain premium levels. In doing so they a) still expend significant energy (and cost) auditing policies that turn out to be in compliance and b) they miss the larger (but more fragmented) occurrence of misclassification which exists “below the waterline.”The good news is that there are strategies to address the information gap that even the playing field from a data standpoint. Better yet you can gain a competitive advantage by identifying misclassified payroll proactively. One benefit is being more exact in the types of policies to audit by going beyond traditional business rules that trigger an audit such as industry size of policy etc. Having better information on class code exposure by policy is a big part of solving the misclassification issue.For more information check out this easy to follow guide with steps that are proven to help carriers get a better handle on this issue.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 Each year Valen Analytics produces an industry outlook report with our view on the market and what insurance companies should pay attention to in the coming year. As a technology and data analytics company we have a unique perspective to share as insurance faces unprecedented disruption and a real need for innovation.And so in the midst of a rapidly changing marketplace with pretty big stakes we publish a thought provoking report outlining what insurers need to focus on over the next 12 months to remain relevant and competitive. No pressure.When I started on our first outlook report in 2014 I pulled it together in just a few days. I didn’t really know if anyone would care what we had to say and wanted to hedge my bets in terms of the time and effort it takes to put something like that together. I was blown away by the hundreds of people who downloaded the report. Then we held a webinar to go through our recommendations more in-depth with over 150 attendees.Ok I thought we’ll up the stakes in 2015.And we did. We were pretty bold in our predictions that big technology companies were going to get much more serious about disrupting insurance; that the market share consolidation already seen in personal lines was coming to commercial lines more quickly than people thought; and that Millennials presented an entirely new paradigm that required insurers to be more transparent and responsive to their needs.Ever feel that twinge of uncertainty when sending an email with a strong response on something you feel passionate about? Well multiply that times 100 and you’ll get a sense of what I was feeling as we published the 2015 Outlook Report last fall.How did it work out? Beyond my wildest expectations.On technology disruption. Not only did Google Compare make its entry just a few months later our Summit keynote speaker Andrew Rose from Compare.com a Google partner actually made the breaking news announcement as the press release went live while he was on stage. Never could we have planned that in a million years! You could’ve heard a pin drop in the room. It was the worst kept secret in insurance of course but that didn’t matter when it was actually made public. You could almost see the wheels turning in our attendees’ heads…What does this mean for my business? On competitors and market share. This is the area where I most felt we could be out pretty far ahead of our skis. After all who really knows how long it will take to see more sophisticated competitors that leverage analytics to drive pricing and risk selection decisions start to dominate in the market? Well we were able to include in our 2016 Outlook Report that in workers’ compensation market share has shifted dramatically amongst the top 10. It’s a clear signal that this market is changing more quickly than what insurance is used to historically. Big sigh of relief!On Millennials. Investment in insurance tech startups is heating up big time. There’s some real momentum building as technology innovators look to serve the insurance customer in ways that are better faster and cheaper. That means more transparency during the buying process more on demand services and applications that make it easy to track your insurance policies and much more. 2016 should be an interesting year to watch how disruption will play out across the distribution supply chain.At Valen we love this stuff. We think this is an incredibly exciting time to be in insurance and serve carriers who are staying ahead of the curve. It will be bumpy at times but in the end the industry desperately needs to redefine what it means to serve the customer take more risks and be willing to test learn and adjust quickly. That’s the reality of modern business.Want to know more about our take on the market? Check out our 2016 Outlook Report and keep us honest as the year plays out. Did we get it right? Share your comments here or drop me a line @ Kirstin.Marr@valen.com.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 The economic crash of 2008 emphasized the importance of predictive modeling as a means to replace dwindling investment income with underwriting gains. However insurance companies today are looking at a more diverse and segmented market than pre-2008 which makes the “old way of doing things” no longer applicable. The insurance industry is increasing in complexity and with so many insurers successfully implementing predictive analytics greater precision in underwriting is becoming the “new normal.” In fact a recent A.M. Best study shows that P/C insurers are facing more aggressive pricing competition than any other insurance sector.But some carriers forget that implementation of predictive models isn’t one size fits all.  It requires more than just selecting the right model. Carriers need to follow very specific steps in the process to yield the best results from their investment. The most important first step is to make sure all relevant stakeholders understand the business goals and organizational commitment. The number one cause of failure in predictive modeling initiatives isn’t a technical or data problem but instead a lack of clarity on the business objective combined with a defect in an implementation plan (or lack thereof). Focus first on securing C-suite support as well as gaining buy-in from the underwriters who will be using the model.The next important step in any predictive analytics implementation is assessing your organization’s resources and capabilities. Regardless of whether the data analytics project will be internally or externally developed your assessment should be equally rigorous. Attention to the following areas will be crucial:Data Considerations: Do you have adequate data in-house to build a robust predictive model? If not which external data sources will help you fill in the gaps?Modeling Best Practices: Whether internal or external do you have a solid approach to data custody data partitioning model validation and choosing the right type of model for your specific application?IT Resources: Ensure that the scope is accurately defined and know when you will be able to implement the model. If time-to-market exceeds 18-24+ months you will lose competitive ground.Reporting: If it can be measured it can be managed. Reporting should include success metrics easily available to all stakeholders along with real-time insights so that your underwriters can make changes to improve risk selection and pricing decisions.Boiling this down it’s critical to align a data analytics initiative to a strategic business priority. Once you’ve done that it will be far easier to garner the time and attention required across the organization. Remember incorporating predictive analytics isn’t just about technology. Its success is heavily dependent on the people and process.Download the Punchlist to EnsureRock Solid Execution 
 The economic crash of 2008 underscored the importance of predictive modeling as a means to replace dwindling investment income with underwriting gains. Even though the market currently show signs of strengthening insurance companies today are looking at a more diverse and segmented market than pre-2008 making the “old way of doing things” no longer applicable. The insurance industry is increasing in complexity and with so many insurers successfully implementing predictive analytics greater precision in underwriting is quickly becoming the “new normal.” In fact a recent A.M. Best study shows that P/C insurers are facing more aggressive pricing competition than any other insurance sector.Many of the insurers who have yet to implement a predictive model however aren’t sure what the first steps are to a successful implementation. One of the most crucial areas of focus should be gaining organizational buy-in. The most sophisticated and accurate model will be a wasted investment if the underwriters choose to deviate from the intended use of the model or worse ignore it completely. Data analytics can only be successful if developed and deployed in the right environment – so underwriters need to be on board with the plan of action as much as the C-suite.That being said given the choice between leading a large-scale change management initiative and getting a root canal many executives would rather pick up the phone to call the dentist. But it doesn’t have to be that way. Following a thoughtful and straightforward process that involves all stakeholders goes a long way. It’s best to prepare the following:A solid business casePlan for cultural adoptionClear straightforward processesA way to be transparent and share results (both good and bad)Training and tech supportWays to adjust – be open to feedback evaluate it objectively and make necessary changesGaining buy-in from the underwriting team requires that they understand why the model is being implemented what the desired outcomes are and what their role is in implementing it. But there are still some who rely solely on their own experience and knowledge that may feel threatened by a data-driven underwriting process. In fact nearly half of the attending carriers at the 2015 Valen Summit cited lack of underwriting adoption as one of the primary risks in a predictive analytics initiative.Insurers with the most success in predictive modeling implementation create a specific set of underwriting rules and effectively communicate how predictive analytics are another tool to enhance their performance rather than something that will replace them entirely. At the same time it is also important to monitor the implementation of underwriting guidelines ensuring that they are being followed appropriately.One company that exemplifies these best practices is Farm Bureau Financial Services which was honored with a Celent Model Insurer Award for their implementation of predictive analytics in underwriting. They ensured success by creating a process that was easy for everyone to understand the output and by implementing it in a consistent manner.While beginning a predictive analytics journey can be difficult and confusing at first glance following these best practices will increase your chances of getting it right on the first try and ensuring your business goals will be met. Remember incorporating predictive analytics isn’t just about technology – success is heavily dependent on the people and process.Get the Step-by-Step Guide to Gain Organizational Buy-In 
 Innovation in insurance is quickly moving from an “advantage” to a “necessity”. Consider this:Towers Watson recently reported that 87% of P&C insurers are seeing profitability with the use of predictive models. As a result many of their competitors are now being adversely selected (whether intentionally or not) along with an increasing disparity between carriers with a competitive edge and those without.Companies like Esurance and Progressive have long found success by building their brands by consistently evolving and changing with growing consumer demands. However now that Google has arrived on the scene the tech giant’s comparison site will put increased pressure on the rest of the insurance companies that have not been able to meet growing consumer demand. Its arrival will affect the entire industry—from the way they interact with customers to how they attract new customers and price risk more accurately.Millennials currently make up the largest generation in the U.S. Unfortunately for the industry they also happen to be the demographic most dissatisfied with insurance products and services. They strongly favor companies with easy-to-navigate websites and they don’t always base decisions on price alone as previous generations were prone to do.These topics have been at the forefront of the insurance industry signaling that the time to innovate is now. But are internal obstacles standing in the way of progress?Two recent polls of P/C executives with 312 responses indicate that there are internal conflicts plaguing insurers that may prevent successful implementation of innovative strategies within an organization.  The poll found that:77% believe underwriters & actuaries are at odds over price77% believe underwriters are resistant to adopting analyticsOne challenge here is that underwriters and actuaries approach their roles with opposing viewpoints: Actuaries try to contain risk while underwriters are assigned to take on more. What ends up happening is that the actuarial team sets rates only to see them “messed up” by underwriters bringing in new business. At the same time underwriters complain that it is “impossible” to write new business with rates that are too high to be competitive in a particular market.The frequently growing adoption of predictive analytics adds a separate challenge because underwriters don’t trust or understand new technology and are concerned that they will be replaced.That being said is there something happening on a fundamental level within many insurers that prevents them from fostering and executing innovation in a long-term sustainable way?We asked ourselves this same question so we hosted a webinar with Bret Shroyer FCAS Solutions Architect at Valen Analytics where we looked at:Details on what’s driving the underwriter-actuary conflictClear view inside today’s most successful insurersHistorical lessons of insurance innovation: credit score and cat modelingHow to address the underwriter resistance issue head on: you can solve thisIf you missed it you can still view the replay here: Failure to Innovate: What the Underwriter – Actuary Conflict Teaches Us. Enjoy!ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 Transparency will come one way or anotherConsumer Reports recently published a scathing exposé of personal auto insurers which Bloomberg summarized with this headline: “Risky Borrowers May Be Treated Worse Than Drunks by Insurers”. The industry is coming under fire for using credit information to price personal auto insurance policies. But as Robert Hartwig president of the Insurance Information Institute noted in an interview for Bloomberg “The fact that insurance-based credit scores are an important part of setting rates is nothing new. It is strongly predictive of loss and that’s a net benefit to consumers.”Hartwig is making the important point that it’s an insurer’s job to use proven credible ways to identify which policyholders are more or less risky and charge accordingly. The entire notion of shared risk requires insurers to make these determinations with the best information available. Who among us would take on the liability of owning a car a home or starting a business if we didn’t have the insurance safety net? One bad car accident could wipe us out financially.I could go on defending insurance and listing the multitudes of other industries that use similar information to assess segment and target their customers. But that would be missing the point. In today’s information-at-your-fingertips world insurers have lagged behind in terms of modernizing their customer experience – which includes a healthy if uncomfortable dose of transparency.Gone are the days when a company controls the information a customer has about their products pricing and service record. The reality is that how you run your business price your products and treat your customers is publicly available 24/7. Granted the information consumers post online isn’t always accurate but insurance could do a much better job at building consumer relationships. According to an Ernst & Young study consumer trust for insurance companies is lower than other industries with 57% of consumers reporting dissatisfaction with the lack of interaction and proactive communication from insurers.If insurers aren’t having conversations and engaging their customers then the industry is letting its reputation be defined by others and studies show that your customers are more likely to share a bad experience than a good one. Investigations like the one from Consumer Reports are much more likely to target those industries that don’t engender consumer trust. There’s nothing fundamentally wrong about auto insurers having tested all types of information to find what is most predictive of loss. It’s not dissimilar to how online retailers collect our information as we surf the web to serve up relevant products and offers or apps that track our behavior at increasing rates. Insurers have an opportunity to step up efforts to create a real dialogue with consumers in order to start building trust. If they don’t they will continue to be an easy target for criticism and complaints.ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 They Don’t Always See Eye-to-EyeIt’s a common tale. The actuarial team sets rates (i.e. prices) only to see them “messed up” by underwriters bringing in new business. Underwriters often complain that its “impossible” to write new business with rates that are too high to be competitive in a particular market.Do you see this dynamic playing out in your organization? Take our 1-question poll on the cause of friction between underwriters and actuaries.This friction is understandable given the fundamental difference in viewpoints between the two:The actuary is typically focused on controlling the downside while the underwriter is typically focused on maximizing the upside.Actuaries are try to contain risk while underwriters are actually assigned the job of taking on more.Actuaries ask “What’s the worst that can happen?” while underwriters contemplate “How great could this account be for us?”Bring the PeaceHere are a few tips to help bring the two sides together. After all both functions are critical to the success of any insurance company and everyone wins when these two groups are working together collaboratively.Actuary Gripe: Underwriters aren’t following the pricing guidelinesUnderwriter Response: “Sometimes underwriters have risk information that doesn’t match up with the rate plan. Can we add this as a rating element or include it in our discretionary pricing schedule?”Actuary Gripe: Underwriters care more about meeting their production goals than they do about risk quality.Underwriter Response: “We can manage what we can measure. If the goal is production we’ll increase production. If the goal is good quality business help us identify that business and we’ll target it.”Underwriter Gripe: Agents don’t like to work with us; we ask for too much information.Actuary Response: Initial information helps qualify a risk through underwriting and additional info is needed to offer a quote. If we help the agents understand what information is needed at what time we can lessen the burden up front to improve the working relationship.Underwriter Gripe: I don’t have enough pricing flexibility.Actuary Response: The rate plan will never be able to replace underwriting expertise.  You can identify risks that are better than manual – go ahead and be competitive. But that means you’ll also have to be debiting the worse than average risks or we we’ll wind up going over our loss ratio target.If you’d like more information on how actuaries and underwriters can overcome common obstacles fill out our 1-question poll. We’ll share the results and more tips. ABOUT THE AUTHOR:Kirstin Marr is the chief brand advocate for Valen Analytics paving the way for prospective clients to lead the innovation initiatives required to compete in today’s marketplace. She has a passion for building companies that invent leading-edge technologies to improve customers’ lives and solve the inefficiencies that exist in many traditional marketplaces. Kirstin also has a long-standing commitment to philanthropy and community leadership. She was most recently Board President for Colorado MESA a non-profit that serves underrepresented and economically disadvantaged students to graduate from college and successfully pursue careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). She also co-founded a non-profit to benefit the Teen Lounge at Children’s Hospital Colorado. 
 From Google and Facebook to online retailers like Walmart and Oversock.com the technology revolution is swirling around insurance is one of the last major industries that has yet to be modernized. Top performing carriers and tech companies have one thing in common: They win profitable market share through data-driven decision-making. Tech is becoming a mainstay in the industry—and that means an exponential increase in the need for tech talent.50% of the insurance workforce is set to retire in the next ten years and the industry will have 400000 positions to fill by 2020. As Baby Boomers move into the next phase of their life we need Millennials to step up to the plate to fill their shoes. The bad news is they’re not.80% of Millennials report having limited knowledge and understanding of the employment opportunities available within the insurance industry. In addition to that Millennials think working in the insurance industry is frankly boring. College freshmen aren’t necessarily dreaming of a career as a “Data Analyst” when they graduate. Now put “Insurance Data Analyst” up as a career choice and and we’re even lower on the list. If we’re going to attract the right data talent in the coming decade the insurance industry has to do something to make this stuff look sexy starting right now.It’s no longer enough to simply provide stable job opportunities; it is crucial to find a way to make insurance relevant to a new breed of employees. More diverse than ever before the next generation of workers differs with regards to age gender cultural backgrounds skill sets and working styles. Studies have proven that they crave innovation independence and flexibility gravitating toward companies like Google and Facebook that have built empires around those same principles.That being said what changes need to be made in order to accommodate the highly connected diverse and tech-savvy millennial generation? The answer lies in utilizing technology such as big data and analytics to help bring insurance into the 21st century. Even more importantly there is an opportunity for tech-minded talent to help make the industry more nimble efficient and able to create an engaging customer experience that allows insurers to attract and retain the best risks. Leading insurers are creating sustainable underwriting profits by leveraging data analytics and the timing couldn’t be better to match technology solutions with human capital that knows how to leverage it.Insurance is playing catch-up in convincing the brightest talent that this is an industry ripe for innovation especially as it pertains to the millennial generation. While insurance may not have been “cool” for some time there are ways to make it an attractive option by focusing on what the diverse millennial generation wants and needs—the ability to innovate and use technology to improve people’s daily lives.In a joint survey conducted by the Business Roundtable (BRT) and Change the Equation (CTEq) of their member CEOs respondents offered several solutions to address the talent gap:70% found internships to be a useful mechanism to help ensure that employees were immediately productive.54% said that assisting educational institutions with curriculum development would improve productivity.37% thought apprenticeship programs held real promise.21% recommended assisting education institutions with classroom instruction.Given the talent pool is scarce and competition is fierce insurance companies will need to step into this century to draw in talent more quickly. The first step is to band together and recognize that by collaborating as an industry we can tell a compelling story about the growing opportunities available appeal to the millennial generation and quash this talent crisis.Tell us what you think!Are your underwriters excited about innovation?Take our 1 question poll now. 
 The insurance industry is one of the last remaining industries to not reach full digitization and root the business in analytics. Insurers have held on to tradition but with Millennials and tech giants officially marking their arrival on the scene they can resist change no longer. The big question is: Will they adapt and innovate or will they lose relevance with their customers like other companies did that resisted change in the face of technology industry transformations (i.e. Blockbuster vs Netflix or credit card lenders in the 80’s vs. Capital One)?Google Facebook Amazon and Overstock (among others) are all developing insurance offerings. They clearly see opportunities to create efficiencies and make a profit by leveraging the immense data they have about their customers. Their business models are centered on collecting data and analyzing customer-buying patterns in order to create the best customer experience – which means delivering a better and faster service at a lower price.Insurers like Progressive Geico and State Farm are already playing in the digital arena and have a head start compared to mid-sized and small insurers because they understand how the online game is played. In fact Progressive’s CIO has suggested they are so far ahead of smaller carriers that those carriers “might as well give up.” While a bit harsh there’s no question that new entrants coming into the insurance industry bring with them even greater competition for a customer base that is rapidly changing.At the forefront of customers willing to jump ship are Millennials who have surpassed the Baby Boomers to become the largest population in the country at 76.6 million strong. According to a recent survey by Capgemini North American consumer satisfaction with insurance decreased by 8.3% in 2014 which is no coincidence considering the fact that Millennials are the demographic most dissatisfied with insurance products and services. If insurance doesn’t take extra steps to innovate and entice this generation Millennials will more than likely gravitate toward a well-known tech company that already understands what they are searching for and what they are buying.These should be taken as warning bells and there are solid ways to adapt defend and grow your company:Knowing what you insure. If you’re going to stay ahead of big trends and maintain profitable margins you have to be better at selecting risks that fit your business and price them accordingly.Using data analytics to evaluate options which allows you to test and learn select the best approach and deliver results that make the greatest strategic impact.Accelerating the journey to become a data-driven decision organization. There are a handful of insurers using predictive analytics in specific areas of their business but insurers that aren’t overhauling organizational culture to think with a data-driven mindset are already behind.The future is now so it is no longer acceptable to continue doing “business as usual” simply because it’s the easy answer. These new entrants are data-driven and tech savvy and they understand how to deliver a modern consumer experience that will attract the largest generation in the U.S. There is a silver lining though. Google’s entrance to insurance has signaled that innovation and evolution is arriving. These are exciting times and the companies that will thrive are those that will embrace the opportunity to reinvent how to serve and engage their customers.photo credit: via photopin (license) 
 The Best Lessons Come from Your CustomersThe marketplaces we compete in are relentless and unforgiving. We all want to grow our businesses win against the competition and provide value for our customers and shareholders. For those of us that have been at this awhile we have to keep our eye on the competitors we know well and an even keener eye on the up and comers out to prove they have a better way of doing things.At the 2014 TechCrunch Disrupt legendary billionaire investor Mark Cuban summed it up pretty well.  “There is no sport as competitive as business…It’s 24 by 7 by 365 by forever and there are all these young kids out here [gesturing to the live audience in attendance] trying to kick your ass.”Oftentimes it’s our customers that provide the best perspective on what really matters about what we do for them. I’m not talking about the nitty gritty detail of product features and benefits but rather the bigger picture of how technology inventors make the lives of our customers easier to achieve important goals.The lessons shared below are incredibly valuable for any technology company. Recognizing how our technologies interact with and impact people is key. And even more importantly it behooves all of us to take a step back and realize that when customers choose to implement our solutions they are signing up for a much bigger job to make the effort successful for their employees customers and shareholders. It’s our job to be at their side for the whole journey. Every Decision Counts Hawaii Employers’ Mutual Insurance Company (HEMIC) knew they had to provide a way for their underwriters to focus their time on more complex accounts that require their expertise and overcome the old-school mentality of needing to look at every account. That’s easier said than done and resistance to change is natural.However HEMIC was appropriately reacting to an increasingly competitive market in commercial insurance and keeping up in today’s environment means capitalizing on technology to increase underwriting efficiency improve pricing precision and provide decision support. “It took time to gain comfort with the system” said Regina Harris VP of Underwriting. “It was a cultural shift but we’ve made that shift.”Change creates friction and unforeseen implications. In the short run it’s easier to maintain the status quo and it takes a steadfast determination to evolve your organization to adopt new technologies and new ways of doing things. Your Employees Will Do the Right ThingFarm Bureau Financial Services a regional P&C insurer had significant loss ratio issues in their workers’ compensation division. Even though they had been using analytics in other areas of the company for many years they hadn’t adopted it for workers’ compensation insurance. Like HEMIC they recognized the change wasn’t going to be easy for their underwriters and they needed a way to support the transition to data-driven decision making.Steve Wittmuss commercial lines VP for Farm Bureau put it this way “I can’t say ‘start underwriting work comp’ and expect them to know what to do. They’d either have avoided it or pretended to know what they’re doing.”The leadership at Farm Bureau was very thoughtful in their communication and respect for their underwriters’ experience. “Some of our people have been underwriting for a long time. If you’re not careful they think you’re challenging their knowledge” Wittmuss adds. “We still give them a band they can write that business in. They have a lot of ability to do stuff they need to do to bring the business on.”And it’s paying off. Wittmuss notes that even when the underwriting staff receives complaints from customers who have rate increases “Many people when we’ve tried to increase the rates go out shopping and then they stay with us. That tells me that we were underpriced and that other companies are using predictive modeling. If we didn’t do this we’d be at a competitive disadvantage.” Invest in Your Customers’ SuccessSociety Insurance which just celebrated 100 years in business serves small business owners. Before adopting predictive analytics Society relied on its underwriters to differentiate risk. Like HEMIC and Farm Bureau Society’s underwriters were concerned that this new technology would limit their decision making authority and create friction with their agents who they rely on to bring in new business.“We really specialize in trying to get to small customers” explains Dominic Weber VP and actuary at Society. So they focused on how analytics would help them identify key ways to make their businesses more successful including “better claims handling accurate pricing upfront and better understanding of how to market services and audit [policies].”To address the concerns of his underwriters and agents Weber emphasized the need for clear communication and keeping a focus on the customer. “Because of Society’s background as a mutual insurance company we are invested in our customers for the long term…Everyone has to buy into the fact that the model is going to give them good information about the policyholder” he explains of the cultural shift. “It was a big educational process. The solution was not taking away authority it was going to give more guidance.”photo credit: toddwendy via photopin cc Learn more about the increasingly rapid adoption of data and analytics at the2015 Valen Summit: The Gold Rush! 
 What? Yes insurance is on the precipice of massive change and it’s not farfetched to see the potential benefits for both industry and consumers. I’m sure there will be disbelievers. After all insurance gets its fair share of criticism – some deserved and some shortsighted. It is true that insurance has fallen short in keeping up with today’s customer needs. However that’s evolving as more insurance companies are stepping up to face what is arguably the most rapid large-scale change in its history.When the economy went into a downward spiral the impact to the property and casualty insurance industry was profound. Many people will be surprised to learn that the premiums insurance companies charge don’t cover the claims and related expenses that are incurred. What that means is that the insurance industry overall loses money on its core business – writing insurance policies. Where insurance companies have made substantial profits is on the investment income made by using insurance premiums to make lucrative long-term investments. But all that changed in 2008.For an industry that’s been around for over 100 years making fundamental changes to how it operates and makes a profit is no small feat and it’s in our collective interest to have a financially sound insurance industry. Imagine getting a loan for a car a home or a small business without the safety net of property and casualty insurance. We’d be financially devastated if our home burned down or we were involved in a serious car accident without insurance coverage.That said we need the insurance industry to reinvent itself thrive in a new economic environment and adapt to the digital revolution. To that end these three examples of how the insurance industry is stepping up deserve a shout-out.#1: Work Comp Insurers Deliver Leading the commercial insurance industry workers’ compensation carriers are running more profitable underwriting operations. Even with rising medical costs and inherent uncertainty about the risks they insure work comp insurers have made remarkable progress toward profitability.Insurers measure profit by looking at two numbers – loss ratio (losses/premium) and expense ratio (cost of doing of business) – that add up to their combined ratio. If an insurer’s combined ratio is 100 they are break-even. If the combined ratio is over 100 percent the company is running at an underwriting loss and every point below 100 measures the underwriting profit. With a 14% gain toward profitability in just 2 years workers’ compensation carriers are definitive leaders who have successfully lowered the average combined ratio from 115 in 2011 to 101 in 2013. The final numbers for 2014 aren’t in yet but they are expected to follow this trend.A big contributor to this turn-around comes from insurers using advanced data analytics to help manage their business. By leveraging big data and predictive analytics insurers do a much better job of making sure riskier businesses pay more and lower risk businesses pay less. It helps insurers to become more profitable while also giving their customers a fair price.One great example of a company that has done this well is Farm Bureau Financial Services. They offer many types of insurance but were struggling with workers’ compensation. Underwriting performance was deteriorating rapidly and the competition was outperforming them. Immediate action was required to bring this line of insurance back to profitability. True pros Farm Bureau implemented predictive analytics into their underwriting process with the best execution plan we’ve seen. They empowered their underwriters with new tools to make better decisions and in just six months they saw significant improvement and are now profitable.#2: E-Commerce Comes to InsuranceLittered throughout 2014 were big announcements that the technology industry is preparing to make its mark on insurance. From Google to Facebook to online retailers Walmart Sam’s Club and Overstock the technology revolution is swirling around insurance as one of the last major industries in need of modernizing.For some this type of change is intimidating but many insurers see the opportunity for innovation and a chance to reinvent the relationship they have with their customers. Insurance companies and agents will do very well over the next decade when they leverage in-depth relationships with their customers and combine them with innovative solutions and today’s customer experience expectations. Customers will also win as they will have more choice real-time customer service and increased transparency.#3: Millennials Meet InsuranceIn an industry buzzing with how it’s going to reinvent itself there’s a lot to learn from Millennials about staying relevant. And insurance is listening. MyPath is a new web portal to draw Millennials to the diverse career potential insurance has to offer. Helping to plant the seeds early InVEST brings insurance professionals to high school classrooms to raise awareness and share personal work experiences.  Change the Equation a CEO-led coalition bridging the gap between math and science education and the workforce is helping insurance leaders connect with the broader corporate community to bring young people into the fold and get them excited about their future. With 50% of the insurance industry nearing retirement the timing couldn’t be better.It may seem strange to hear but insurance truly is the place to be in 2015 and it’s going to be a fun if a bit bumpy ride.photo credit: ecstaticist via photopin cc 
 The Insurance Data and Analytics RevolutionIt’s a very interesting time for our industry – to say the least – and industry executives are gathering to highlight the insurance data and analytics revolution at Valen’s Summit next March. Insurance executives cannot simply hope for a ‘good year’ anymore. Implementing data and analytics is the only way to keep the insurance industry alive especially as new data-driven technology and retail companies enter the field.The intimate peer-forum event will tackle the issue of increasingly rapid adoption of data and analytics within insurance companies combined with the potential impact from technology companies such as Overstock entering the insurance industry.Patrick M. Byrne CEO of Overstock was named the CEO with the highest employee approval rating (92 percent) of any major corporation by Forbes magazine and his passionate stance on serving Overstock’s customers will show you why. Byrne will lay out why insurance was a natural extension for Overstock and why other technology and e-commerce giants see opportunities to innovate in insurance. Overstock’s Goal: “Insurance Done Right”Consider these remarks from Byrne and ask if your company is ready to compete in a data-driven world:“Overstock’s mission is to offer high-quality products at low prices in order to save people money and the launch of our insurance tab fits this mission beautifully. Our insurance tab is in effect an insurance exchange which lets consumers compare live quotes for insurance on residential vehicle and small business insurance and bind insurance policies right from our site. This is insurance done right…Millions of consumers are looking for more affordable insurance. We’re here to help.” Want to Hear Why Patrick Byrne Entered Insurance?Click Here Now for a Front Row Seat! Forewarned is ForearmedInsurance has recently become more interesting to companies with money to burn. Hedge funds are upping their bets in reinsurance and expecting lucrative returns as well as tax benefits. They are making a notable impact moving from traditional sidecar investments to starting their own reinsurance businesses. Many worry whether they will have the stomach to remain for the long haul when the next big catastrophe hits.In primary insurance its e-commerce giants like Google Amazon and Overstock and retailers like Walmart and IKEA who are making waves. When these companies see dollar signs in new industries it’s because they believe there are fundamental inefficiencies that can be exploited. How Tech Companies Disrupt New MarketsFirst up is to apply data-driven strategies to customer acquisition. According to The Economist’s survey The Way Forward: Insurance in an age of customer intimacy and Internet of Things insurance executives agree — they declared distribution (i.e. acquisition) as the number one vulnerability for disruption.What’s particularly troubling is that half the respondents don’t really know how well prepared the insurance industry is for the changes coming in the next five years. They score the industry a 3 out of 5 for preparedness. You could call that punting – and the industry can’t afford to punt especially now.A common theory is that these tech and retail giants are turning to insurance because there is an opportunity to scale. For instance within workers’ compensation many insurers and agents compete heavily for the bigger commercial accounts but overlook the majority of the market in small commercial.Transaction-oriented tech companies approach markets very differently. Once they learn the business and prove the economic model (in the case of insurance through personal lines) they execute a go-to-market strategy to grab market share at scale. Our research shows that small commercial accounts make up 85% of the market. While big accounts will remain a priority now is the time to consider how to make your portfolio less vulnerable to losing market share. Understanding Millennials as New CustomersAt 76.6 million strong millennials currently make up the largest generation in the U.S. Unfortunately for the industry they also happen to be the demographic most dissatisfied with insurance products and services which makes them more easily wooed by insurance offers from technology and e-commerce giants they already know and trust. Millennials represent $1.68 trillion in purchasing power so it is crucial for the industry to adapt to serve the needs of their future customers business owners and employees.Take into consideration that as much as 90% of customer research is done before a phone call is made. That means that companies who can provide as much transparency as possible about how they work and what they offer is increasingly important. According to a J.D. Power survey millennials strongly favor companies with easy-to-navigate websites and they don’t always base decisions on price alone as previous generations were prone to do. Insurers who don’t provide the experience the next generation is looking for put their market share at risk.When catering to millennials as new customers prioritizing the customer experience and positioning yourself as a forward-thinking insurer is key. Take a cue from how consumers feel about another industry: banking. A recent “Millennial Disruption Index” found that the leading banks in the U.S. were all among the ten least-loved brands by this generation. It comes as no surprise then that 73% of millennials would consider opting into new financial services from companies they recognize — Google Amazon Apple PayPal and Square – over their current bank. You don’t want this to also happen to you. Valen’s Summit Brings the Right Mix of Experts to YouIn addition to Overstock our Summit will feature numerous industry leaders including a presentation from Matt Mosher SVP of Rating Services for A.M. Best on how insurance data and analytically driven insurers improve ratings and financial projections.Three insurance CEOs will bring their perspective on what it takes to win in today’s competitive underwriting environment:Robert Darby President of Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Companies will share what it takes to recruit retain and develop analytically-minded talent.Martin Welch CEO of Hawaii Employers’ Mutual Insurance will discuss what new skills insurance leaders need to manage the large-scale changes they face.Steve Hartman President and CEO of Falls Lake Insurance Companies will provide his first-hand account of what it takes to be a change agent and how to evolve your underwriting organization by including experienced staff and new team members.You simply cannot afford to miss the Valen Summit taking place in Vail Colorado from March 3 through 6 2015. Click here for more information or to register today! photo credit: ImNotQuiteJack via photopin cc 
 SUMMIT 2015: THE GOLD RUSH!MARCH 3-6 2015VAIL COLORADOJoin us for our 2015 Summit focused on the increasingly rapid adoption of data and analytics within insurance companies combined with the potential impact from technology giants entering insurance. It is all about how insurers can and need to change to keep up with the paradigm shifts this type and speed of change often signify.This is an executive-level conference with an intimate peer forum environment. Our 2015 Summit focuses on the increasingly rapid adoption of data and analytics within insurance companies combined with the potential impact from technology companies entering insurance. It is all about how insurers can and need to change to keep up with the paradigm shifts this type and speed of change often signify. REGISTER NOW KEYNOTE: WHY OVERSTOCK ENTERED THE INSURANCE BUSINESSPatrick M. Byrne CEO of Overstock will share the tech industry’s keen interest in insurance and why they recently launched an online insurance agency. CEO FEATURED SPEAKERSRobert Darby President at Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Companies will discuss how to attract analytics talent to insurance.Martin Welch CEO of Hawaii Employers’ Mutual Insurance will share what skills leaders need to navigate today’s technology revolution.Steve Hartman President & CEO of Falls Lake Insurance Companies will share his journey of being a change agent and how Falls Lake is incorporating analytics within underwriting to gain a competitive edge. Who Should AttendProperty and casualty insurance executives focused on improving underwriting profitability and implementing data and analytics initiatives.REGISTER TODAY and get early bird registration discount!We look forward to seeing you there! 
 Think loss-free policies are risk free? THINK AGAIN.Valen’s new Risk Score a tool that separates good risks from bad is bolstered by over 1000 new variables allowing underwriters to select and price policies more accurately.The insurance industry understands what a big deal this is. In fact check out all the coverage and accolades we’ve gotten:Carrier ManagementClaims Journal Insurance BroadcastingInsurance Innovation ReporterInsurance Networking NewsITAPro MagazineWorkCompWireWorkers’ Compensation InstituteIf you don’t want to get left behind and would like to learn more about our risk score and InsureRight Platform request a demo today.  photo credit: Mike Licht NotionsCapital.com via photopin cc 
 Click Here to Find Out How To Protect Your Book From The Competition!Case Study: I WANT TO GROW PROFITABLYA super-regional work comp carrier wanted to grow profitably as they entered new markets with knowledgeable competitors. They needed to help their underwriters better identify pockets of profitability within their target markets. They also wanted to know which agents were sending them the best business whether they were competitively pricing that business and ultimately lowering their loss ratio.They kept hearing about instances where carriers’ loss ratios were suffering because they were being adversely selected against by other carriers who were using predictive analytics. This particular carrier was less worried about it happening within their existing portfolio; they were focused on how to grow into new markets. But they wanted to grow in the right way.They were putting in place a strategy to create steady and profitable growth in newer regions and class codes along with a new agency plan that would produce a durable competitive advantage. It was important for them to leverage new data and information because they knew they were going up against competitors with niche expertise in these new markets. The competition had a leg up in terms of knowing the idiosyncrasies and jurisdictional differences in these new states and they needed a tool that leveled the playing field.With that backdrop their logical next step was to evaluate whether they could leverage advanced data and analytics to provide them with the knowledge they lacked in-house for these new markets. They reached out to Valen for help because we provide both data and analytics.We partnered together and created a predictive analytic framework that leveraged our consortium database to give their underwriters the confidence they needed to select and price risk profitably and  meet their growth numbers.So the natural question is… how did it work?We started with a detailed analysis of 41500 policies representing $432 million in premium. Those policies had an aggregate loss ratio of 70.3%.When this carrier entered the market using advanced data and analytics they immediately realized a significant advantage even over those carriers with the niche expertise that we mentioned earlier. They were able to identify more than 28000 policies they could write profitably out of the initial 41500 that we studied. Those 28000 policies added up to $320 million or 74% of the total available premium. And they could expect those policies to come in at a loss ratio of 61%. Looks good at a 9 point gain right? Hold on because it gets better.The 9 point gain is actually just the beginning of the story because the remaining $112 million in business that they would now send to the competition represented the worst business in those markets – to the tune of a 96.8% loss ratio.Why such a dramatic difference? It comes down to the combination of risk selection and pricing. The question you have to ask yourself is can you pick the right risks and give them the right price? Carriers lose first when they choose the wrong risks and they lose even more when they get the price wrong.Bottom line this particular carrier moved forward using predictive analytics to grow into 20 new states and open up the number of class codes they write. Their strategy has allowed them to grow profitability and consistently.I’d say it worked out pretty well. 
 Today we made a pretty big announcement – we launched our new Risk Score.It’s an involved process that requires months of trial and error and rigorous testing. The Risk Score is a comparison tool that separates good risks from bad on new and renewal workers’ compensation policies. The best risks are defined as those within the top 10 percent of premium while the worst risks represent the bottom 10 percent of premium in terms of loss ratio performance. Underwriters use the Risk Score which is part of our InsureRight Platform to select and price policies more accurately.Click Here to Find Out How Your Competitors Beat Adverse Selection!What’s most exciting from our perspective is the partnership we are building with insurers around actionable data. Everyone benefits when insurers come together to pool their data because it opens doors to solutions that push the industry forward. Our data consortium has grown by 40 percent CAGR since 2010 the last time we released a Risk Score. With this growth we were able to leverage thousands of data variables to find the best leading indicators of risk for this new version. As a result the new Risk Score boasts a 3x lift in performance to help insurers lower their loss ratio.A Market First: Loss-Free Prediction AccuracyThe problem with loss-free policies is they all look the same. However Valen’s new Risk Score is the next frontier and a perfect example of how working collaboratively with insurers helps the market overall by using data to predict what will happen on loss-free policies.Marking an industry first the new Risk Score provides workers’ compensation insurers with better insight into historically loss-free policies and enables underwriters to distinguish between risks even when the policy holder is claim-free. The Risk Score accurately identifies a 30 percent loss ratio difference between the best and worst performing policies.Click here to read the full press release about Valen’s new Risk Score announcement and how workers compensation insurers are using it to improve their loss ratio. 
 Click Here to Find Out How Your Competitors Beat Adverse Selection!A regional mutual carrier wanted to know how vulnerable their book was to a carrier coming in and using predictive analytics. Their underwriting team had a lot of expertise and in depth knowledge about their market but they were savvy to the notion that advanced data and analytics can create adverse selection. It was a smart move from them to figure out how vulnerable they would be if a new competitor entered their market or an existing competitor started using predictive analytics.They had three fundamental questions to answer:How vulnerable was their book to new competitors?How well was their current model working?Did they have enough data in their model?We help carriers with this type of analysis all the time. In order to take real action following this exercise it needs to be specific to the scenarios an individual carrier faces. It’s easy for us to show that most carriers have vulnerability but what matters is how that would actually play out for your market and your book of business.In this case the carrier actually had an existing model in place using their own data. And they wanted to know what would happen if a carrier using a model built from more robust industry-wide data started to compete against them.Here’s what it looked like in the head-to-head comparison.Their loss ratio over a 4 year period was 66.7%. But things changed pretty drastically with a competitor using more robust data for their predictive model.  This carrier’s loss ratio jumped to 79.3% and the competitor came in at 59.1%. That spread of 20.2 or what we call the “loss ratio differential” is the difference between their loss ratio and the new competitor’s.As you can imagine this didn’t sit well with the carrier. From this analysis we were able to answer their initial question around quantifying how vulnerable they were to a competitive threat. They were vulnerable to the tune of 12.6 loss ratio points meaning their loss ratio could rise by 12.6 points if a savvy competitor came in and stole profitable market share.And now? They’ve moved forward using a model that contains more data than they have in-house.  By leveraging a broader market view they’re sitting pretty with 2013 loss ratio of 50 points.photo credit: sniggie via photopin ccphoto credit: skyloader via photopin cc 
 Click Here to Find Out How To Protect Your Book From The Competition!KIRSTIN MARR:Welcome to the “Today’s Underwriting Battleground: Where Belief and Data Collide” web seminar hosted by Valen Analytics and Farm Bureau Financial Services. I’m Kirstin Marr VP of Marketing for Valen.We will begin by introducing our featured speakers.Steve Wittmuss is Commercial Vice President for Farm Bureau Financial Services. Steve has held several positions at Farm Bureau including running specific business units and as regional claims vice president. Steve began his insurance career at Farm Bureau Insurance Company of Nebraska and joined the Farm Bureau Financial Services organization in 2003.Matt Frazier is head of workers’ compensation strategy for Valen Analytics an advanced data and analytics company. Prior to joining Valen Matt served as Sr. VP of Sales at AmTrust Financial where he was responsible for nationwide expansion of their workers compensation product. He also held several roles at FirstComp Insurance Company in underwriting marketing and business development.Matt will get us started off with an overview of important market dynamics to consider as carriers look to improve underwriting profitability in workers’ compensation. Steve will share how Farm Bureau has successfully implemented predictive analytics into the underwriting workflow.Matt I’ll turn it over to you to begin.MATT FRAZIER:A number of industry trends have recently come together that point to an increasingly complex marketplace.  From 2005 to 2012 Return on Equity dropped from 10% to 4% for companies with a combined ratio of 100.  And given the fixed yield investment maturities predominate in most insurance carrier portfolios the low investments yield hangover most of us are still reeling from is still a pressure to find ways to lower combined ratios. We all know: when ROE goes down you have to make improvements in combined ratio to make up for that loss.The problem is exacerbated for companies with combined ratios over 100. According to the Insurance Information Institute commercial lines carriers need to drop combined ratio 3.6% for every 1% decline in investment yield in order to maintain a constant ROE. You can see on this chart for workers’ compensation the combined ratio number is even larger at 5.7% due to a longer tail and the typically longer investment maturities for that LOB.With an average 2012 Work Comp combined ratio of 110.4 it’s no wonder that carriers are increasingly focused on increasing profitability in underwriting. Ernst & Young in their 2014 P&C Outlook report pointed to the fact that the best performing carriers are leveraging data and analytics to refine market segmentation strategies across the board. What E&Y found is that pricing and underwriting discipline is proving to be a primary driver in improving financial performance.The word discipline here speaks to using better tools to promote consistency and increased rigor with regard to pricing to risk. They also call out work comp as a line of business showing promising signs of combining strong pricing with moderating loss performance to drive underwriting profitability. Bottom line – there’s a more sophisticated market emerging which is creating a greater urgency for individual carriers to maintain their competitive advantage. Today the market spells opportunity for those willing to embrace new analytics technology and doom for those that are last to the lunch table.One place we see increasing sophistication is around risk selection and pricing. One leading indicator of increased market sophistication is the number of carriers we’ve talked to that worry deeply about adverse selection and how to measure it. Notice Company B in this exhibit. Company B has decided not to embrace analytics to better separate risk along the entire spectrum of predictive characteristics. They underwrite and price based on the tradition approach indicated by the horizontal line maintaining a conservative overall pricing and risk selection perspective but better risks are largely subsidizing worse risks.Company A enters the marketplace using a data driven strategy and systematically capitalizes on non-obvious risk characteristics.  As a result Company A’s pricing strategy segments risk in Company B’s portfolio in a way that systematically gives Company A the competitive edge for business in the green. Company A eats that market share. Company B ends up with the business in the black or as it were in the RED at the pricing levels at which the market is clearing.Why? Because carriers with more sophisticated pricing methodologies win more of the best risks and do a better job avoiding the bad risks. Those bad risks end up being written by their competition.  Being able to identify whether adverse selection is happening to your portfolio is critical – and the sooner you know the sooner you can take action to protect your market share.To put the situation into a predictive analytic frame we often talk about deciles or bins into which these predictive analytic technologies will categorize populations of policies.  The better risks are given a score of 1 2 or 3 the average risks a score of 4 5 or 6 and the worst risks in a portfolio are given a score of 8 9 and 10. This is just one way to think about a prediction or a predictive score.If a carrier‘s portfolio score is trending up it can indicate adverse selection.  If the pricing is not trending up with the portfolio score it may indicate rate inadequacy or what I call adverse selection inertia which if not proactively addressed can be the “end of days” for a carrier. This bin framework will come up again later as we dialogue about predictive analytic implementation.So let’s take a look at how market share breaks out in workers’ compensation today. When you look at a quick snapshot that shows the distribution of market share by the 110.4% 2012 average combined ratio it illustrates how market share consolidation can play itself out over time. Today 20% of the market is writing at an underwriting profit and 44% writes at worse than average performance.For a moment let’s focus on these 2 groups. What are the top performers doing to achieve better than average results and what do they know that the other group doesn’t?Well… the 20% achieving an underwriting profit know the risks that they are writing and retaining better than their competition and are able to consistently make better risk selection and pricing decisions. Additionally they are successfully identifying pockets of the market where they can build margin into their risk portfolio.The best performing carriers take their proprietary knowledge and infuse it into their business operations with a focus mainly on pricing and underwriting.It’s critical to note lest you think this is all about David vs. Goliath that the top 20 in term of Market Share are fairly evenly spaced out along this continuum with 9 of the top 20 carriers performing worse than the average combined. This isn’t about large vs. small carriers. It’s about who knows more about what they insure.This tells me that unless a poor performing carrier is willing to spend the time resources and technology KNOWING WHAT THEY INSURE better than their competition they will be vulnerable to adverse selection by their competitors.And finally what about the group of insurers in the middle?  Here’s the group to keep your eye on. If this group implements the strategies currently being used by the profitable group they have the opportunity to steal market share from that group and also send their most unprofitable segments to the worst performing group.When we look at this 2012 snapshot we see that nearly half the market is poised to grab profitable market share. Which side of the moat are on? If you are in the 20% of the market currently enjoying an underwriting profit how will you protect your market share? Niche players will no longer be able to rely as heartily on specialized knowledge.If you are writing at or above the average combined ratio are you being adversely selected against? How do you know? Is your underwriting operation ready to embrace a data driven test & learn discover and improve ethos. How will you protect your book of business from taking on poor performing risks that your competitors are no longer writing? How will you compete for the better parts of your portfolio? Are you using your data to build a durable moat or is the Trojan Horse already in the castle?The race for market share is a natural outgrowth when industries become more sophisticated in customer acquisition retention and pricing strategies.This dynamic isn’t new to insurance. If we look at personal auto market share consolidation is a done deal with 80% of the market share held by the top 10 carriers. Progressive comes to mind as the first company in auto insurance that embraced new ways of using data and analytics to gain profitable market share in the non-standard auto business. Now its table stakes. Very few personal auto carriers are not using increasingly sophisticated data driven strategies to defend protect and advance. Going after a risky market means you have to be confident that you know which part of that market will be profitable.Progressive was an early adopter of predictive analytics like credit score and that provided the confidence they needed in their pricing approach. They knew more about individual consumers then their competition did. Progressive was only too happy to share competitive rates with consumers which allowed them to write business at the price they felt adequately covered their risk – creating positive selection for them and adverse selection for their  competitors who were quoting a lower price on what Progressive determined were the worse-performing risks.GEICO is another iconic example. They’ve leveraged their direct writing business model to offer lower premiums and dwarf the competitions’ advertising budgets. These examples provide a really good preview for how other P/C lines will evolve as data and analytics become more pervasive.Of course we all know the examples in other industries of companies that outperformed their competition and became dominant market leaders.The common thread in and out of insurance is the evolution of organizations becoming more analytically-driven.A final trend that is top of mind for insurance executives that we speak with on a regular basis is the need for top talent. Insurance recruiting firm The Jacobson Group has reported that 50 percent of the insurance workforce is set to retire within the next 10-15 years and that at least 200000 new positions will be added by the year 2020. At the same time McKinsey noted in a May 2010 Report that 20% of the underwriting workforce is nearing retirement and they estimated we will need 25000 new underwriters by 2014. Who will replace our most tenured underwriting staff? It’s the younger generation as 50% of the U.S. workforce will come from the Millennial generation in the next 5 years or so.Before considering the needs around training a more junior workforce the industry is pressed with the question of whether this younger generation will see insurance as an attractive industry with exciting career potential. And as many insurers now lament recruiting competition for analytics talent is fierce. Our industry is in competition with the likes of Facebook and Google.Many studies have been conducted on what the Millennial generation takes into consideration when making career decisions. On the screen is a sample list of questions they often ask themselves about a specific job opportunity. We need a way to communicate that insurance offers an incredibly valuable service to consumers and businesses alike helping to facilitate home ownership and entrepreneurship through shared risk. And we have an incredible opportunity for bright talented minds to innovate using advanced data and analytics to improve underwriting profits as one example.The macro trends we reviewed today are evidence of a more sophisticated and complex marketplace which require new rules of engagement for acquiring and retaining profitable business.Kirstin I’ll turn it back over to you.KIRSTIN MARR:Thank you Matt. We’re going to switch gears a bit for a Q&A session with Steve Wittmuss of Farm Bureau Financial Services. Steve has a valuable example to share of how carriers can succeed using advanced tools in the underwriting and across the organization.Let’s start off by learning your story – where were you at how did you decide to start using analytics and you did you implement the process?STEVE WITTMUSS:Thank youFarm Bureau Financial Services is a Regional Property Casualty Insurance Company that writes business in 8 states. The majority of our books is in personal lines but there is a push to grow our commercial book of business. We identify our markets as main street businesses.I think we were fairly typical for a commercial writer of our size – we did not specifically underwrite our work comp business.  We underwrote the rest of the risk and if we liked that part we took the work the comp. So a couple of things occurred to us:Our loss ratio really blew up around 2010.  If you remember the chart earlier where they showed companies based on loss ratio – we were in the upper end for work comp and very unprofitable but the rest of our book was profitable. We knew we had to make a change with our work comp.Our underwriters had limited knowledge on what to look for when underwriting work comp. If our only response was to tell our underwriters to underwrite work comp we would not be successful.My first introduction to using analytics was when I worked with personal lines auto so I know how predictive modeling works.  In personal lines auto we were able to level out our loss ratios by risk class with rate differences between the classes by up to 40%.  So I knew if I found the right tool that predictive modeling would work for work comp too.Using data analytics allows you to be more efficient – you now underwrite by exception rather than try and underwriting everything.  Even if you have an experienced UW staff they still only see a fraction of the potential risks that are out there and many times they never see the overall picture on how profitable a book is.That means underwriters work based on their rules.  If they had a large loss on a risk they may exclude that going forward.  Even if in the big picture it was a good risk.  Predictive modeling frees the underwriter to make the decisions based on facts. So we have decided to use predictive modeling and now we have to introduce it.When introducing to your underwriters you need to tell a story.  Here is our problem and here is what analytics is and here is why it will help us.  Remember to keep it simple and graphs work better than numbers.  I have used the graph used earlier many times in the past.There will be pushback & outliers – don’t hide from this. Everyone has an example of an exception – just acknowledge that that person might be the exception but the group as a whole is not.Make sure you set up systems and processes so your staff can be successful.The actual underwriting decision needs to rest with the underwriter. Valen is just a tool the UW still needs to be the final decision maker.My background is in claims and this is where you get in trouble.  Make sure your decision makers use it as a tool not a crutch.We started off on focusing on the bottom ¼ of our business that was unprofitable.  We built UW rules but gave the UW leeway – an example would be on risks in bin 5 they could use up to a 10% debit or credit on a bin 9 they could use a 10% to maximum debit.We also recognize it will take a while to implement entirely within our book of business.  It is not easy to raise rates on a risk that has had no claims over the last 5 years.  You have to give your underwriters leeway on that decision.Finally you have to share your success stories.In our case I can show that on 9’s and 10’s we were giving credits to the group as a whole and on the first renewal we changed that to giving debits to the group as a whole.  By using that data our underwriters know they are making a difference one policy at a time.KIRSTIN MARR:Why is senior level commitment so important and what does it take to secure that level of commitment?STEVE WITTMUSS:This is no different than any other major project.  It has to have key support and proper resource allocation from Senior Management and it has to cascade down through various levels – whether it is communication IT resources or even a willingness to sell the program.As I mentioned earlier there will be pushback in multiple areas.UnderwritersFirst you are challenging their knowledge – you need to let them knowYou are giving them tools to help them better understand the risks they are underwriting and this allows them to manage by exception.Second you are putting them in the middle of renewals and the data.  Again I think you acknowledge the issue and give them time to move at less than full speed towards implementing on renewal business.  When they see it working they will increase the usage.AgentsHere you are changing the rules so you need to be able to tell your story.  Granted we had it much easier here as we have captive agents.But we had to stop the quoting process to make this happen.  Prior to this agents could quote and rate the business through our system.  Now when one of our agents quotes a WC policy they have to stop the quoting process and contact their UW which allows them to run the Valen report and then they give the agent the amount of the quote.Again they always know someone who is the exception.The ClientYou are moving their cheese.  Of course you will not hear from those whose rates go down from this change.  What we have found it often when a client searches for new coverage we are still competitive.  You have to have faith that if you lose the business then the other company is writing it at a loss.KIRSTIN MARR:You touched on this a little earlier but I think it would be good to discuss what you think are some best practices when you start to implement predicative modeling practices.  Share the FBFS process and approach?STEVE WITTMUSS:First engage your UW staff early and often.  You need to explain predictive modeling to your staff long before you implement any process change.We started talking about using Valen’s products in September and implemented in March.  This gave the underwriters time to get use to the idea plus it allowed us to use underwriters to help develop our processes.Don’t change more than you can handle.Start with the minimum you think you need to be successful.  You can build the rest once you have some victories.We started by focusing on those in bin’s 8’s 9’s & 10’s.We developed rules that still gave UW’s the ability to make decisions; however to show we were serious and to stay engaged as management any actions on those in bin 10 require their manager or myself to be a part of the decision.In addition new business was required; renewal business had a little more leeway.We have a very specific process set up for training on any new process we introduce.We start by developing a job-aide.  This is a step-by-step instruction on how the process will look going forward.  This is an important first step – it keeps all future training grounded to this document.  If changes need to be made to the process as we go forward we must change our job-aide.Every month we have a one-hour call for the department.  In this call we usually 3 twenty minute segments.  When we have a big change we use one of these segments to announce the change – along with why we are doing it and what it means for our staff.After that meeting we have one-hour training session.  The training flows from our Job-Aide to the staff.  If needed we will schedule additional training.Once the new process starts we have one place for staff to go with their concerns or problems.  That way we can see if we have a systems issue a problem that is becoming a trend or it is our staff that just needs some time to adjust.  This also provides consistency in the information provided back to the underwriters and agents.Finally I have my own six week rule.  At the launch I check with people on how things are going.  Then I check that against how things are going at the six week mark.  That is usually when attitudes really start to change.  Short of a catastrophe I try not to make any significant changes to a new process or program until that time.I think it is good to have some informal check points as a manager.KIRSTIN MARR:What are different ways carriers can think about measuring success and underwriting improvement?STEVE WITTMUSS:For us it has been easiest to track our renewal changes.  You take what you had in the prior year and compare it to the current year and see what you have.The first six months I can give you our numbers for what our book of business has done.  We can see how we are using it the data for scheduled rating and the premium gains.  I can show you how our underwriters are using the tool per underwriter.  I can tell you the amount of premium increase we have seen. This alone has paid for the program.New business has been more of a challenge for us.  We are just starting to track our new business.  Eventually we will be able to get the same data on new business as we are our renewal business.  Our loss ratio has improved since we have implemented. I doubt that is due directly to the data this quickly but I do believe that awareness by the agents and underwriters is making a difference.One other way that this has helped and I am not sure how to measure it is underwriter engagement.  As I said earlier we did not really underwrite work comp prior to introducing Valen so underwriters were concerned having to do so.  Now however we are discussing work comp as a group; our underwriters are engaged and feel confident that they can make good decisions.  They are asking questions of our products and risk management staff.  By sharing the successes we are having the underwriters see that they are making a difference and that has enhanced their engagement. 
 If you don’t have complete confidence with how you are pricing insurance policies today it will likely cost you more than the premium you are missing out on. A lot more. Too many insurers are adopting much more sophisticated approaches to pricing and leaving their competitors in the dust.If you are incorrectly pricing the risks you are writing today you are vulnerable to a competitor stealing your best business. If a new or existing competitor introduces more aggressive pricing for the good risks that’s a warning sign that they also know when it’s time to walk away from bad business – leaving you to write those worse performing policies at unprofitable rates. It’s called adverse selection. This actually happened to Farm Bureau Financial Services. Watch how they turned it around in just six months.There are a couple of scenarios we see often that illustrate why adverse selection occurs. First is getting it wrong on pricing insurance policies relative to the risk you are taking on. Sometimes we see an insurer’s loss ratio deteriorate simply because they are writing risks that have a much higher potential of blowing up. They literally don’t have the tools necessary to know they are taking on risks that are going to perform worse than average.You can resolve this problem if you have a systematic way to identify riskier business. By rank ordering policies 1-10 with 1 being the best performing and 10 the worst performing policies we see how this plays out. If a carrier writes a lot of business in the 8-10 range AND they get enough rate or price to cover the high likelihood of losses – they will do okay. But what we see quite often is that carriers writing these policies apply rates appropriate for policies in the 4-6 range or 1-3 range.That spells trouble.And this leads us to the second scenario we see happening more often and that’s when an insurer with more sophisticated strategies for pricing insurance policies knows more about the market and individual policies than the other competitors. Insurers who leverage advanced data are able to steal business at impressive profit margins. They get very aggressive on pricing insurance policies with the best performance know how to get an adequate price for the riskier business and have the confidence to walk away and let other carriers take on poor risks at inadequate prices.With this backdrop that’s why we stress that you must have complete confidence in how you price insurance policies. Because if you don’t you are running a risky underwriting operation. Today’s competitors are just too savvy. We worked with a regional insurer who discovered they were vulnerable to the competition – to the tune of over 12 loss ratio points. Watch how they protected their market share and improved underwriting profits.  
 Photo Caption: Valen Analytics recognized by Vice President Joe Biden and CTEq Board Members: Intel – Retired Chairman & CEO Craig Barrett Accenture – CEO (U.S.) Jorge BenitezIt’s not every day you get the opportunity to meet the Vice President of the United States. Valen is an active member of Change the Equation (CTEq) the nation’s premier organization that sits at the intersection of business and education to ensure we have enough students who are proficient at math and science by the time they enter the workforce.It’s an incredibly important cause. We’re a nation built on innovation and we need rockstars in Science Technology Engineering and Math (STEM). The harsh reality is that not enough of our young people are inspired to pursue math and science in school today. We’ve got to change that. And business has a big role in making that happen by supporting STEM education. That’s why CTEq helped inspire Valen to start Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge as a way to let the business community and our youth know that the insurance industry has exciting careers to offer bright talented and analytical minds that pursue a STEM education.Vice President Biden provided a keynote address at CTEq’s Summit to bring attention to the need for a robust partnership between business and education to inspire the next generation of American Innovators. He also recognized companies including Valen Analytics for signing CTEq’s Commitment to Excellence in STEM.Check out this video of the Vice President’s remarks at CTEq’s Summit. LEARN MORE ABOUT TOMORROW’S TALENT CHALLENGE & STEM EDUCATION3 Reasons Why Millennials Should Embrace a Career in Insurance – And Why Insurance Needs Them. Featured in Insurance Thought LeadershipMeet Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge 2014 Scholarship RecipientValen Promotes Insurance Careers to Nation’s Top Business Leaders. Featured in CTEq NOWValen Analytics Promotes Insurance Industry Response to Talent Crisis. Featured in Insurance Innovation ReporterValen Analytics Joins Change the Equation Launches “Tomorrow’s Talent Challenge” 
  Two Work Comp Carriers Save Millions and Prevent Premium FraudPremium fraud and payroll misclassification have been a big news topic lately. We talk with carriers all the time who are trying to optimize their audit departments in different ways. Some approaches work well and others fall quite short.When we spoke with a particular regional carrier and found out how they were trying to fix their misclassification problems we realized their approach was missing the mark. Their intuition was correct that they had significantly higher risk exposure on particular policies and they were trying to do the right thing in order to improve their loss ratio. But they didn’t have a great process to find those policies and attack the problem. Because they didn’t have the resources necessary to physically audit every policy they had to focus on a subset. There were people running around using what we call “blunt force” business rules and creating multiple lists to rank order policies to audit. It was an inconsistent strategy at best — and a far cry from what they needed to get the job done.By creating a common definition (i.e. baseline) they were able to determine the best approach rank ordering their policies and fixing their audit program.And it worked.To the tune of $1 million dollars in immediate bottom line savings and a 3% drop in their loss ratio.In another example a state carrier was motivated to get their premium levels as close to 100% accurate as possible – whether that meant they found additional or return premium. It’s really important for a state fund to look at poor performing policies especially if they are a carrier of last resort – which means they are required to take on policies that private carriers refuse to write. They have to make sure their pricing is adequately covering the exposure they are taking on.Again using a baseline approach this carrier was able to better identify polices that needed to audited (or not) and improve the accuracy of their premium levels. By leveraging advanced data and analytics they realized a 3-to-1 improvement in the results they achieved through their auditing activities. Regardless of whether they found returned premium or additional premium they were able to find $3.02 more for every audit dollar spent versus using traditional business rules alone. That is a pretty massive improvement in cost efficiency.PUNCH LIST: Download 4 Steps to fix payroll misclassification on your book  
 We’ve all taken notice since the New York grand jury released their report showing that New York City’s construction industry cost the city and state approximately $500 million in 2011. The main reason for this staggering loss was unpaid workers’ compensation premiums in which businesses paid salaries off the books or purposely misclassified employees as independent contractors.The situation in New York focused on workers’ compensation in construction but premium misclassification (which includes committing premium fraud) extends well beyond the borders of New York.Premium Misclassification – How Fraud Hurts CarriersFraud or what some refer to as “moral hazard” is one cause of payroll misclassification for which carriers ultimately pay the price. When employers misrepresent the type of work an employee performs or falsely classifies employees as independent contractors it creates meaningful revenue and expense implications for carriers reliant on self-reporting.The NY grand jury specifically recommended a vigorous auditing program to catch bad actors. Interestingly we have found large company insureds (e.g. large construction firms) tend to have less exposure-to-misclassification because they understand they will be physically audited more frequently. As such carriers with sophisticated processes for identifying which policyholders to audit as part of their standard business practice will do a better job at catching premium fraud. That’s the good news.The bad news is that many carriers tend to focus their audit policies on polices above certain premium levels. By doing so they a) expend significant energy (and cost) auditing policies that turn out to be in compliance and b) they miss the larger (but more fragmented) occurrence of misclassification which exists ‘below the waterline.’ WATCH: How two carriers are saving millions by identifying payroll misclassification proactively DOWNLOAD: 4 Steps to fix payroll misclassification on your book 
 It’s all about the people. And insurance carriers who are finding ways to attract next gen talent are setting themselves up to win. Millennials will make up half the workforce within the next six years. As insurance becomes more analytically driven this educated and tech savvy generation is just the right talent pool the industry needs – at just right the time. With half the industry nearing retirement the brain trust of your organization is getting ready to walk out the door. You need systems and data to capture the knowledge of your tenured employees in order to transfer it to the workforce that will be replacing them.Millennials have a different take on the world. They can be far more demanding and less loyal than previous generations at the start of their career. I think back to the beginning of my career and when I watch how this new generation approaches their employers I find myself thinking “Excuse me… you need to pay your dues just like everyone who has come before you.” Perhaps an outdated reaction for an outdated approach to careers consumerism and societal norms. Jack Welch recently shared his insights for managing the Millennial generation.This next generation wants to contribute; their careers have to count for something. This is an advantage for insurers who are creative at telling their story. Insurance serves a common good and helps people rebuild their lives after devastating losses. Entrepreneurs rely on insurance in order to start the next big idea and create jobs. And being behind in the advanced data and analytics game means that there is plenty of room for the brightest young talent to enter our industry and create breakthrough innovations.What is your compelling career story to the Millennials you’ll soon be relying on? 
 by Curt Stevenson CEO Agencyport SoftwareThe conversation around the evolution of automation in Property and Casualty insurance is alive and well—and nowhere more so than in small commercial lines. While new business automation has a firm footing in this commoditized world is it enough in its current state to give small commercial carriers the edge they need to win? What about the value of human touch collaboration and experience? As the industry’s leading P&C web distribution platform provider we at Agencyport think a lot about this kind of stuff and we think there is an inevitable next evolutionary stage in small commercial automation—one that is essential for profitability and that is sitting on carriers’ doorsteps right now.Downward pricing pressure fierce competition and the need to increase margin have both carriers and agents struggling to make a living in small commercial. While the introduction of automation to this arena has improved speed accuracy and efficiencies market pressures are outpacing the current technologies. To win today small commercial carriers have to make it utterly simple and highly effective (read: profitable) for their agent partners to do business with them. User experience is King. Carriers also have to bring as much data to bear on underwriting as possible—data sourced both internally and externally.Arguably the greatest benefit of web automation for both carriers and agents in small commercial is speed—quoting speed binding speed and speed-to-market with new products product lines and geographies. Agents get faster more complete responses from carriers and spend a fraction of the time rekeying; underwriters no longer have to touch straightforward applications giving them valuable time to put their expertise to work on the complex ones; carriers and agents sell and renew more policies in less time; and customers and policyholders get the coverage and information they need faster and more accurately.But profitability in today’s small commercial space requires more than speed. It requires leveraging the latest most open and agile distribution solutions available in order to:Optimize communication and transactions with agents and internal staff across all devices simply and beautifullyEnable real time collaboration with agentsSimplify and facilitate bi-directional integration with modern back office systems and the myriad specialized third-party providers that carriers need in to order to sell the most competitive products to exactly the right audiences simply easily and with as little risk as possible.Agencyport’s partnership with Valen is a natural outgrowth of both companies’ understanding that those carriers that integrate specialized vendor solutions with their proprietary enterprise platforms produce more effective and robust products more quickly efficiently and accurately reducing risk and ensuring that agent partners and policyholders continue to come back for more. Does integration with these services preclude or threaten valuable agent/carrier relationships? Not at all. In fact it bolsters them. A better agent experience over the web improves service and engenders loyalty—boosting business on both sides. And simplified access to third-party data and services such as CRM auto-pre-fill e-signatures and predictive analytics? Again easier more streamlined data-rich processes create happier partners and better-informed decision-making—not at the exclusion of the agent relationship but as an enhancement to it. Why wouldn’t carriers want as much real-time access to more and better data and simpler workflows as they could possibly get?About Agencyport SoftwareAgencyport lets P&C insurers engage simply and quickly with their product distribution channels and technology partners. We offer the world’s leading web-based distribution technologies and robust business intelligence tools—making the complex business of insurance simpler and smarter increasing efficiency improving underwriting and sharpening carriers’ competitive edge.  
 Accenture recently surveyed over 550 commercial lines underwriters and a couple key stats jumped out:72 percent said that maintaining underwriting and pricing discipline was a top challenge.50 percent need more access to intuitive tools that can place information at their fingertips the moment a decision needs to be made.Accenture rightly points out that the use of predictive models for pricing and risk evaluation along with increasing the use of external data will become even bigger market differentiators as carriers invest significantly to take the next leap forward. We see the beginnings of that happening today in worker’s compensation.We pulled the latest stats from A.M. Best and noticed that workers’ compensation is on the verge of mirroring personal lines from an overall performance perspective. As workers’ compensation continues to improve with the adoption of new tools and analytics market share consolidation – due to increasingly sophisticated pricing strategies amongst carriers – is a trend to monitor in 2014.The latest A.M. Best data reveals that 56 percent of the workers’ compensation market is performing better than the industry average combined ratio of 110.4. That number is comprised of 122 carriers 11 of which are recognized as the “top 20” workers’ compensation carriers based on direct written premium. A deeper dive shows that 12 percent of the market– representing just a small handful of companies – is only .1 to .6 percent away from performing better than average. If these companies improve their performance even slightly the percentage of workers’ compensation carriers performing better than average increases from 56 to 68 percent. This aligns closely with the 69 percent of personal lines carriers that perform better than average in both auto and homeowners.So the question becomes – are you above or below the line on this graph? If you are below the line how will you support your underwriters so you can maintain your market position? If you are above the line you are in a shrinking part of the market and your underwriters need better tools to grab profitable market share. Download Valen’s 2014 Outlook Report for Commercial Lines to see these and other key trends to watch. 
 We love the business we’re in. Helping carriers insure businesses and consumers so that they can build and protect their future is rewarding. Today we get to give back and do something that is just plain cool. We’re announcing our membership in the nation’s premier STEM education organization Change the Equation.Everyone in insurance knows we need to attract more data and analytics talent. Well Valen has created a simple effective way for insurers to plug in. We can solve our massive talent shortage by working together to move the needle.This problem is not unique to the insurance industry – U.S. companies across industries and geographies are creating solutions and building our future workforce.Check out Change the Equation and join us for an information session on Nov. 14 to learn how you can participate. 
 Today we announced the availability of Manage within the InsureRight Platform for homeowners carriers. Manage allows insurers to leverage leading indicators of risk to understand portfolio performance overall and within segments to better inform strategic decisions and achieve underwriting profitability.Manage presents a powerful competitive advantage for homeowners carriers. Using advanced data and analytics carriers will gain statistically valid portfolio insights to expose strengths and weaknesses within their own book of business and ultimately chart a path toward profitability in this historically poor performing line of insurance.Check out the product announcement 
